The Indian National Congress (About this sound pronunciation (help·info)) (INC, often called the Congress), is one of two major political parties in India; the other being the Bharatiya Janata Party. Congress is one of the largest and oldest democratically run political parties in the world.[12][not in citation given] The party was founded in 1885 during the British Raj; its founders include Allan Octavian Hume – a prominent member of the Theosophical Society, Dadabhai Naoroji and Dinshaw Wacha. In the late nineteenth and early to mid-twentieth centuries, Congress became a pivotal participant in the Indian Independence Movement, with over 15 million members and over 70 million participants in its opposition to British colonial rule in India.

After independence in 1947, Congress became India's dominant political party; as of 2015, in the 15 general elections since independence, it has won an outright majority on six occasions and has led the ruling coalition a further four times, heading the central government for 49 years. There have been seven Congress Prime Ministers, the first being Jawaharlal Nehru (1947–64), and the most recent Manmohan Singh (2004–14). The party's social liberal platform is generally considered to be on the centre-left of Indian politics.[13]

From 2004 to 2014, the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance, a coalition of several regional parties, formed the Indian government and was headed by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. In November 2014, the party was in power in ten states and had a majority in six – Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya and Mizoram. In Assam, Kerala and Uttarakhand it shared power with its alliance partners. The Congress has previously directly ruled Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Punjab and Goa. In the 2014 general election, the Congress had its poorest post-independence general election performance, winning only 44 seats of the 543-member house.

The Congress' social policy is based upon the Gandhian principle of Sarvodaya – the lifting up of all sections of society – which involves the improvement of the lives of economically underprivileged and socially marginalised people. The party primarily endorses social liberalism – seeking to balance individual liberty and social justice, and secularism – asserting the right to be free from religious rule and teachings.The Congress was founded in 1885 by Indian and British members of the Theosophical Society movement, including Scotsman Allan Octavian Hume.[14] It has been suggested[by whom?] that the idea was conceived in a private meeting of 17 men after a Theosophical Convention held in Madras in December 1884. Hume took the initiative, and in March 1885 the first notice convening the first Indian National Union to meet in Poona the following December was issued.[15]

Its objective was to obtain a greater share in government for educated Indians and to create a platform for civic and political dialogue between educated Indians and the British Raj. The Congress met each December. The first meeting was scheduled to be held in Poona, but due to a cholera outbreak there it was shifted to Bombay. Hume organised the first meeting in Bombay with the approval of the Viceroy Lord Dufferin. Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee was the first president of the Congress; the first session was held from 28–31 December 1885, and was attended by 72 delegates. Representing each province of India, the Party's delegates comprised 54 Hindus and 2 Muslims; the rest were of Parsi and Jain backgrounds.Within the next few years, the demands of the Congress became more radical in the face of constant opposition from the British government, and the party decided to advocate in favour of the independence movement because it would allow a new political system in which the Congress could be a major party. By 1905, a division between the moderates led by Gokhale – who downplayed public agitation – and the new "extremists" – who advocated agitation and regarded the pursuit of social reform as a distraction from nationalism – opened. Bal Gangadhar Tilak – who tried to mobilise Hindu Indians by appealing to an explicitly Hindu political identity displayed in the annual public Ganapati festivals he inaugurated in western India – was prominent among the extremists.[17]

The Congress included a number of prominent political figures; Dadabhai Naoroji, a member of the sister Indian National Association was elected president of the party in 1886 and was the first Indian Member of Parliament in the British House of Commons (1892–95). It also included Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Lala Lajpat Rai, Gopal Krishna Gokhale and Mohammed Ali Jinnah – later leader of the Muslim League and instrumental in the creation of Pakistan. The Congress was transformed into a mass movement by Surendranath Banerjea and Sir Henry Cotton during the partition of Bengal in 1905 and the resultant Swadeshi movement.[ongress as a mass movement

Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, when he was president of the Congress Party
Mahatma Gandhi returned from South Africa in 1915. With the help of the moderate group led by Ghokhale, Gandhi became president of the Congress, and formed an alliance with the Khilafat Movement. In protest, a number of leaders – Chittaranjan Das, Annie Besant, and Motilal Nehru – resigned to set up the Swaraj Party. The Khilafat movement collapsed and the Congress was split.[18] After the First World War, the party became associated with Mahatma Gandhi, who remained its unofficial spiritual leader and icon.[19] The rise of Gandhi's popularity and his Satyagraha art of revolution led to support from Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Khan Mohammad Abbas Khan, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Chakravarti Rajgopalachari, Dr. Anugraha Narayan Sinha, Jayaprakash Narayan, Jivatram Kripalani, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The prevailing nationalism, Gandhi's popularity, and polices aimed at eradicating caste differences, untouchability, poverty, and religious and ethnic divisions, the Congress became a forceful and dominant group. Although its members were predominantly Hindu, it had members from other religions, economic classes, and ethnic and linguistic groups.[citation needed]

At the Congress' 1929 Lahore session under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru, Purna Swaraj (complete independence) was declared as the party's goal, declaring 26 January 1930 as "Purna Swaraj Diwas", Independence Day. The same year, Srinivas Iyenger was expelled from the party for demanding full independence, not just home rule as demanded by Gandhi.[20]

The British government allowed provincial elections in India in the winter of 1936–37 under the Government of India Act 1935. Elections were held in eleven provinces – Madras, Central Provinces, Bihar, Orissa, United Provinces, Bombay Presidency, Assam, NWFP, Bengal, Punjab and Sindh. After contesting these elections, the Indian National Congress gained power in eight of the provinces – the three exceptions were Bengal, Punjab, and Sindh. The All-India Muslim League failed to form the government in any province.[21] The Congress ministries resigned in October and November 1939 in protest against Viceroy Lord Linlithgow's declaration that India was a belligerent in the Second World War without consulting the Indian people.[22]

In 1939, Subhas Chandra Bose, the elected president in both 1938 and 1939, resigned from the Congress over the selection of the working committee. The party was not the sole representative of the Indian polity – other parties including Hindu Mahasabha and Forward Bloc.[23] The party was an umbrella organisation, sheltering radical socialists, traditionalists, and Hindu and Muslim conservatives. All the socialist groupings, including the Congress Socialist Party, Krishak Praja Party, and Swarajya Party, were expelled by Gandhi, along with Subhas Chandra Bose in 1939.[19]

In 1943 Azad Hind – an Indian provisional government – had been established in Singapore and was supported by Japan.[24][25]

In 1946 Indian soldiers, who had fought alongside the Japanese during World War II, were tried by the British in the INA trials. In response the Congress helped to form the INA Defence Committee, which assembled a legal team to defend the case of the soldiers of the Azad Hind government. The team included several famous lawyers, including Bhulabhai Desai, Asaf Ali, and Jawaharlal Nehru.[26] The same year, Congress members initially supported the sailors who led the Royal Indian Navy mutiny, but they withdrew support at the critical juncture and the mutiny failed.[citation needed]

Post-independence
After Indian independence in 1947, the Indian National Congress became the dominant political party in the country. In 1952, in the first general election held after Independence, the party swept to power in the national parliament and most state legislatures. The party held power nationally until 1977 when it was defeated by the Janata coalition. It returned to power in 1980 and ruled until 1989, when it was once again defeated. It formed the government in 1991 at the head of a coalition, as well as in 2004 and 2009, when it led the United Progressive Alliance. During this period the Congress remained centre-left in its social policies while steadily shifting from a socialist to a neoliberal economic outlook. The Party's rivals at state level has been national parties the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPM), and various regional parties such as Telgu Desam.[citation needed]

Nehru/Shastri era (1947–66)

Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Congress Prime Minister of India (1947–64)
From 1951 until his death in 1964, Jawaharlal Nehru was the Congress' paramount leader under the tutelage of Mahatma Gandhi, whose Indian independence movement dominated the Congress Party. Congress gained power in landslide victories in the general elections of 1951–52, 1957, and 1962.[27] During his tenure, Nehru implemented policies based on import substitution industrialisation and advocated a mixed economy, where the government-controlled public sector co-existed with the private sector.[28] He believed the establishment of basic and heavy industries was fundamental to the development and modernisation of the Indian economy.[27] The Nehru government directed investment primarily into key public sector industries – steel, iron, coal, and power – promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies.[28] Nehru embraced secularism, socialistic economic practices based on state-driven industrialisation, and a non-aligned and non-confrontational foreign policy that became typical of the modern Congress Party.[29] The policy of non-alignment during the Cold War meant Nehru received financial and technical support from both the Eastern Bloc and the Western Bloc to build India's industrial base from nothing.[30][31]

During his period in office, there were four known assassination attempts on Nehru.[32] The first attempt on his life was during partition in 1947 while he was visiting North-West Frontier Province in a car. The second was by a knife-wielding rickshaw-puller in Maharashtra in 1955.[32] The third attempt happened in Bombay in 1956.[32] The fourth was a failed bombing attempt on railway tracks in Maharashtra in 1961.[32] Despite threats to his life, Nehru despised having excess security personnel around him and did not like his movements to disrupt traffic.[32] In 1964, Nehru died because of an aortic dissection, raising questions about the party's future.[33][34][35]

After Nehru's death, K. Kamaraj became the president of the All India Congress Committee.[36] Kamaraj had also been involved in the Indian independence movement and he introduced education to millions of the rural poor by providing free education along with a free midday meal, when he was chief minister of Tamil Nadu (1954–63).[37]

As a member of "the syndicate" – a group within the Congress – he proposed the Kamaraj Plan that encouraged six Congress chief ministers and six senior cabinet ministers to resign to take up party work.[38][39][40] Kamaraj was widely credited as the "kingmaker" in Indian politics for bringing Lal Bahadur Shastri to power in 1964.[38] No leader except Shastri had Nehru's popular appeal.[41] Shastri became a national hero following the victory in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965.[42] His slogan, "Jai Jawan Jai Kisan" ("Hail the soldier, Hail the farmer"), became very popular during the war.[43] Shastri retained many members of Nehru's Council of Ministers; T. T. Krishnamachari was retained as the Finance Minister of India, as was Defence Minister Yashwantrao Chavan.[44] Shastri appointed Swaran Singh to succeed him as External Affairs Minister.[45]

Shashtri appointed Indira Gandhi – Jawaharlal Nehru's daughter and former party president – Minister of Information and Broadcasting.[46] Gulzarilal Nanda continued as the Minister of Home Affairs.[47] As Prime Minister, Shastri continued Nehru's policy of non-alignment[48] but built closer relations with the Soviet Union. In the aftermath of the Sino-Indian War of 1962, and the formation of military ties between the China and Pakistan, Shastri's government expanded the defence budget of India's armed forces. He also promoted the White Revolution – a national campaign to increase the production and supply of milk by creating National Dairy Development Board.[49]

The Madras anti-Hindu agitation of 1965 occurred during Shastri's tenure.[50][51] On 11 January 1966, a day after signing the Tashkent Declaration, Shastri died in Tashkent – reportedly due to a heart attack but the circumstances of his death remain mysterious.[52][53][54]