Technological revolution is (in general meaning) a relatively short period in history when one technology (or better a set of technologies) is replaced by another technology (or by the set of technologies). As Nick Bostrom wrote: “We might define a technological revolution as a dramatic change brought about relatively quickly by the introduction of some new technology.” [1] It is an era of an accelerated technological progress characterized not only by new innovations but also their application and diffusion.

A difference between technological revolution and technological change[2] is not clearly defined. The technological change we could see as an introduction of an individual (single) new technology, while the technological revolution as a period in which more new technologies are adopted at the almost same time. These new technologies or technological changes are usually interconnected - as 3rd Kranzberg's law of technology says: "Technology comes in packages, big and small.A new technological revolution should increase a productivity of work, efficiency, etc. It may involve not only material changes but also changes in management, learning, social interactions, financing, methods of research etc. It is not limited strictly to technical aspects. Technological revolution so rewrites the material conditions of human existence and also reshape culture, society and even human nature. It can play a role of a trigger of a chain of various and unpredictable changes.[4]

"What distinguishes a technological revolution from a random collection of technology systems and justifies conceptualizing it as a revolution are two basic features:

1. The strong interconnectedness and interdependence of the participating systems in their technologies and markets.

2. The capacity to transform profoundly the rest of the economy (and eventually society)."[5]

The consequences of a technological revolution are not exclusively positive - for example, it can have negative environmental impact and cause a temporal unemployment (so called technological unemployment).

The concept of technological revolution is based on the idea (not unquestioned) that technological progress is not linear but undulatory. Technological revolution can be:The most known example of technological revolution was the Industrial revolution in the 19th century, the Scientific-technical revolution about 1950 - 1960, the Neolithic revolution, the Digital revolution etc. The notion of "technological revolution" is frequently overused. Therefore, it is not easy to define which technological revolutions having occurred during world history were really crucial and influenced not only one segment of human activity but had a universal impact. One universal technological revolution should be composed from several sectoral technological revolutions (in science, industry, transport etc.).

We can identify several universal technological revolutions which occurred during the modern era in Western culture:After 2000 there became popular the idea that a sequence of technological revolutions is not over and in the forthcoming future we will witness the dawn of a new universal technological revolution. The main innovations should develop in the fields of nanotechnologies, alternative fuel and energy systems, biotechnologies, genetic engineering, new materials technologies etc.