India has been traditionally vulnerable to natural disasters on account of
its unique geo-climatic conditions. Floods, droughts, cyclones, earthquakes and
landslides have been a recurrent phenomena. About 60% of the landmass is
prone to earthquakes of various intensities; over 40 million hectares is prone to
floods; about 8% of the total area is prone to cyclones and 68% of the area is
susceptible to drought. In the decade 1990-2000, an average of about 4344
people lost their lives and about 30 million people were affected by disasters
every year. The loss in terms of private, community and public assets has been
astronomical.
1.2 At the global level, there has been considerable concern over natural
disasters. Even as substantial scientific and material progress is made, the loss of
lives and property due to disasters has not decreased. In fact, the human toll and
economic losses have mounted. It was in this background that the United
Nations General Assembly, in 1989, declared the decade 1990-2000 as the
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction with the objective to reduce
loss of lives and property and restrict socio-economic damage through concerted
international action, specially in developing countries.
1.3 The super cyclone in Orissa in October, 1999 and the Bhuj earthquake in
Gujarat in January, 2001 underscored the need to adopt a multi dimensional
endeavour involving diverse scientific, engineering, financial and social
processes; the need to adopt multi disciplinary and multi sectoral approach and
incorporation of risk reduction in the developmental plans and strategies. Over the past couple of years, the Government of India have brought about
a paradigm shift in the approach to disaster management. The new approach
proceeds from the conviction that development cannot be sustainable unless
disaster mitigation is built into the development process. Another corner stone of
the approach is that mitigation has to be multi-disciplinary spanning across all
sectors of development. The new policy also emanates from the belief that
investments in mitigation are much more cost effective than expenditure on relief
and rehabilitation.
1.5 Disaster management occupies an important place in this country’s policy
framework as it is the poor and the under-privileged who are worst affected on
account of calamities/disasters.
1.6 The steps being taken by the Government emanate from the approach
outlined above. The approach has been translated into a National Disaster
Framework [a roadmap] covering institutional mechanisms, disaster prevention
strategy, early warning system, disaster mitigation, preparedness and response and
human resource development. The expected inputs, areas of intervention and
agencies to be involved at the National, State and district levels have been
identified and listed in the roadmap. This roadmap has been shared with all the
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. Ministries and
Departments of Government of India, and the State Governments/UT
Administrations have been advised to develop their respective roadmaps taking the
national roadmap as a broad guideline. There is, therefore, now a common
strategy underpinning the action being taken by all the participating
organisations/stakeholders. A copy of the roadmap is at The institutional and policy mechanisms for carrying out response, relief
and rehabilitation have been well-established since Independence. These
mechanisms have proved to be robust and effective insofar as response, relief and
rehabilitation are concerned.
2.2 At the national level, the Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal Ministry for
all matters concerning disaster management. The Central Relief Commissioner
(CRC) in the Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal officer to coordinate relief
operations for natural disasters. The CRC receives information relating to
forecasting/warning of a natural calamity from India Meteorological Department
(IMD) or from Central Water Commission of Ministry of Water Resources on a
continuing basis. The Ministries/Departments/Organizations concerned with the
primary and secondary functions relating to the management of disasters include:
India Meteorological Department, Central Water Commission, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Rural
Development, Ministry of Urban Development, Department of Communications,
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Petroleum,
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation. Ministry of Power, Department of
Civil Supplies, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
Planning Commission, Cabinet Secretariat, Department of Surface Transport,
Ministry of Social Justice, Department of Women and Child Development,
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Department of Food. Each
Ministry/Department/Organization nominate their nodal officer to the Crisis
Management Group chaired by Central Relief Commissioner. The nodal officer is National Crisis Management Committee (NCMC): Cabinet Secretary,
who is the highest executive officer, heads the NCMC. Secretaries of all the
concerned Ministries /Departments as well as organizations are the members of
the Committee The NCMC gives direction to the Crisis Management Group as
deemed necessary. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs is responsible for
ensuring that all developments are brought to the notice of the NCMC promptly.
The NCMC can give directions to any Ministry/Department/Organization for
specific action needed for meeting the crisis situation.
2.4 Crisis Management Group: The Central Relief Commissioner in the
Ministry of Home Affairs is the Chairman of the CMG, consisting of senior
officers (called nodal officers) from various concerned Ministries. The CMG’s
functions are to review every year contingency plans formulated by various
Ministries/Departments/Organizations in their respective sectors, measures
required for dealing with a natural disasters, coordinate the activities of the Central
Ministries and the State Governments in relation to disaster preparedness and
relief and to obtain information from the nodal officers on measures relating to
above. The CMG, in the event of a natural disaster, meets frequently to review the
relief operations and extend all possible assistance required by the affected States
to overcome the situation effectively. The Resident Commissioner of the affected
State is also associated with such meetings.
2.5 Control Room (Emergency Operation Room): An Emergency
Operations Center (Control Room) exists in the nodal Ministry of Home Affairs,
which functions round the clock, to assist the Central Relief Commissioner in the
discharge of his duties. The activities of the Control Room include collection and transmission of information concerning natural calamity and relief, keeping close
contact with governments of the affected States, interaction with other Central
Ministries/Departments/Organizations in connection with relief, maintaining
records containing all relevant information relating to action points and contact
points in Central Ministries etc., keeping up-to-date details of all concerned
officers at the Central and State levels.
2.6 Contingency Action Plan: A National Contingency Action Plan (CAP)
for dealing with contingencies arising in the wake of natural disasters has been
formulated by the Government of India and it had been periodically updated. It
facilitates the launching of relief operations without delay. The CAP identifies
the initiatives required to be taken by various Central Ministries/Departments in
the wake of natural calamities, sets down the procedure and determines the focal
points in the administrative machinery.

2.7 State Relief Manuals: Each State Government has relief manuals/codes
which identify that role of each officer in the State for managing the natural
disasters. These are reviewed and updated periodically based on the experience of
managing the disasters and the need of the State.
2.8 Funding mechanisms: The policy and the funding mechanism for
provision of relief assistance to those affected by natural calamities is clearly laid
down. These are reviewed by the Finance Commission appointed by the
Government of India every five years. The Finance Commission makes
recommendation regarding the division of tax and non-tax revenues between the
Central and the State Governments and also regarding policy for provision of
relief assistance and their share of expenditure thereon. A Calamity Relief Fund
(CRF) has been set up in each State as per the recommendations of the Eleventh
Finance Commission. The size of the Calamity Relief Fund has been fixed by the 