If interested, please reach out to Iram Shah email iramnutechsoft.com, phone 203-961-8911 ext 222. Please note This is a juniormid-level role. Our Client is looking for Power Pivot Data Analyst for their FTE Excel Data Analyst role. Data Analyst (Technology) Description of Position The candidate will be a part of our Client's Technology Group. The Data Analyst collaborate with various team members across the firm to understand business needs and identify how technology can meet those needs through the design and implementation of efficient and standardized use of Excel Power Pivot based reporting connected into Qlik Infrastructure. Data Analysts work with Business Analysts and Stakeholders to understand the business problem we are solving for and the intended outcome. They strategize on the approach, collaborate on requirement definitions and partner with the Development Team to test and deploy the solution. RESPONSIBILITIES The Excel Data Analyst will be responsible for Creating, implementing, and maintaining data file structures. Ensuring procedures are being properly documented. Providing ad-hoc reporting in response to client specific requests Refining and automating regular processes, tracking issues and documenting changes. Assisting other analysts with complex query tuning and schema refinement. KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITIES Minimum of three to five years of advanced Microsoft Excel work experience combining and analyzing data from various sources, and generating reports and graphics Knowledge of Excel Power Pivot, Slicer functionality, DAX calculation is a must Knowledge of Accounting a plus Knowledge of Business Intelligence tools and Data normalizations a plus Strong analytical skills and technical orientation. Strong customer service orientation with the ability to interface with all levels within our clients' organizations. Demonstrated attention to detail with reliable time management, follow through skills. Excellent written and verbal communication. Ability to be flexible and adapt to change quickly. Must possess a strong sense of teamwork and the ability to effectively collaborate with others. Ability to work well in a team environment. High level of accountability and ownership. Ability to "get-it-done" and follow through. Ability to organize, plan and prioritize work with a high level of independence and autonomy. Ability to work in a rapidly changing environment and wear a variety of hats. Demonstrated ability to effectively multi-task and context switch effectively between different activities and teams. Energy industry experience a plus. TECHNICAL SKILLS REQUIRED Strong knowledge of Microsoft Office Suite. Advance to expert skill level in Excel. Demonstrated ability to use Excel to combine and analyze data from various sources and generate reports and graphics. Must be able to combine large volumes of data for consolidated reporting. High level of proficiency with advanced formulas, dynamic ranges, advanced charting, and slicers. Demonstrated capability of Excel Power Pivot, Slicer functionality, DAX calculation is a must Power BI a plus. Scripting a plus. Basic programming knowledge or experience is helpful. If interested, please reach out to Iram Shah email iramnutechsoft.com, phone 203-961-8911 ext 222.,Job Requisition Number:82982

At Bloomberg, our products are fueled by powerful information. We combine data and context to paint the whole picture for our clients, around the clock from around the world. In Global Data, we are responsible for delivering this data, news and analytics through innovative technology - quickly and accurately.

Climate change, regulatory pressures, the importance of human capital and diversity are just a few critical factors global investors consider to best identify risks and opportunities. Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) data is crucial for our clients providing deeper intelligence than conventional financial analysis.

As a team, we are responsible for enhancing and reporting Environmental, Social and Governance related content for the Bloomberg Terminal, plus reported on and normalized metrics, key analytical ratios, industry-specific metrics and proprietary scores. We display ESG and Fundamental data together, backed by news for context. More than 320,000 business leaders rely on the real time financial information available on the Bloomberg Professional Service, and your passion and expertise for sustainable investing will have tremendous impact on our growing product offering.

The Role:


You will leverage your demonstrated technical expertise, knowledge of the financial markets, and understanding of clients needs to enhance our data products and generating premium content. You will work across data teams and departments to optimize workflows to increase automation and improve internal operations ensuring quality and timely data. As a technical leader in the organization, you will be trusted to deploy code to production, ensure best practices are adhered to, and mentor others.

Well trust you to:
Combine subject-matter-expertise and technical skills to research new data sets to expand coverage and generate premium content
Design statistical methods to perform quality control of our products
Analyze internal processes to identify opportunities for improvement, as well as devise and implement new innovative workflow solutions to improve the time to market/quality/create efficiency in your dataset
Build database schema and maintain workflow configurations for critical functions such as acquisition, worklist management, and quality control
Contribute to the creation of best practices and guidelines for governance
Utilize data visualization skills to report on results of on-going operations and projects, as required
Collaborate extensively with internal stakeholders (primarily Core Product, Technical Operations, Engineering, and Sales)
Engage with internal and external users to resolve inquiries in a timely manner
Provide mentorship to data analysts on team
Youll need to have:
A bachelor's degree, preferably with combined studies in Information Systems and Finance or related business and, STEM fields
Established presence in virtual development communities such as GitHub, Stack Overflow, and HackerRank
Proven ability to use technology to innovative data products and processes
Applied proficiency with one or more programming/scripting languages (e.g. Python, R, JavaScript, Java) as well as SQL
Experience using statistical and machine learning methods to solve real-world problems
Experience using data visualization tools such as Tableau or QlikSense
Excellent written and verbal communication skills, especially when explaining technical processes and solutions to business stakeholders and management
Strong attention to detail and high degree of demonstrated decision-making and problem solving skills
Ability to work independently as well as in a team environment
Ability to influence others and lead change
Applied proficiency with software engineering best practices
Experience training and mentoring others
Legal authorization to work full-time in the United States and will not require visa sponsorship now or in the future
Wed love to see:


An advanced degree in Business, Computer Science or Engineering
Experience working in an Agile development team
Project management skills and/or experience, CAPM, PMP and/or CSM preferred
Does this sound like you?
Apply if you think we're a good match. We will be in touch to let you know what the next steps are.

We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.,Purpose

Looking for a fast paced and high growth opportunity with a dynamic service-based software company? As a Data Analyst at FJA-US, youll be joining our team of qualified and diverse individuals who come together as a collective to deliver our clients the best possible product. Constantly changing client-driven deadlines and deliverables need to be met, working with other Data Analysts, youll be analyzing and modeling data into FJAs very own platform. Essentially, customizing the product for a specific client, down to the very littlest of details.

We collaborate through integrated product teams, cross-functional teams, and employee resource groups, while thriving with the support of training and development, mentors and every day coaching.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities

Translate and configure product data into a useable structure format.

Review and analyze product data from client sources such as databases and/or spreadsheets. Put data into FJAs custom Product Machine by using specific input properties and processes.

Create and execute test cases, reports, and scripts to ensure validity and accuracy of work.

Manage lifecycle of product data using standard software development methodologies.

Review written documentation.

Effectively and professionally communicate and interface with FJA team members and clients.

Perform configuration duties.

Assist senior product modelers with translating product specification templates into FJAs Product Machine.

Develop a thorough understanding of the product model structure.

Understand the products and processes in the insurance companies supported by FJA.

Knowledge, Skills & Abilities

Ability to create and conduct presentations in a professional, organized, engaging and confident manner to a variety of audiences.

Ability to successfully work independently with minimal supervision & confidently manage up.

Demonstrates and facilitates professional communication skills; must be able to understand,listen, write and speak fluently, professionally, and, effectively in the English language.

Effective facilitation, collaboration, negotiation and conflict resolution abilities.

Establishes and maintains solid interpersonal relationships with clients and FJA team members across all levels of an organization. Builds others up; focused on team success vs. individual success.

Exhibit personal presentation in a professional manner as it relates to appearance, communication and actions.

Flexible and able to thrive in a fast paced, high growth, team based environment while successfully handling competing and ever changing priorities and responsibilities.

Motivated, responsible and organized self-starter who excels at time management, meeting commitments, knocking down roadblocks, and,
possesses a passion for continuous learning and improvement.

Solid track record of taking responsibility and holding ones self accountable for high quality task and project deliverables within established deadlines.

Strong analytical, research and problem solving skills. Pro-active ability to identify, assess, improve/refine and solve complex challenges, processes and/or situations.

People Leadership/Development Duties

No direct supervisory duties.

As directed, provide job related mentorship and training to peers. As requested, provide peer review feedback.

Education, Certification and/or Formal Training

High School diploma required; Bachelors degree in Mathematics, Economics, IT, Computer Science or closely related field preferred.

Experience

Minimum 1 year of data analytics and/or modeling experience.

Healthcare insurance industry experience is a plus.

The following area of experience are pluses: Java, Agile Methodologies, JIRA, Confluence, Maven, Mercurial, Subversion, Eclipse, QVT, continuous integration tools and/or concepts, application servers.

Working Environment

This job generally operates in a professional office environment. This role routinely uses standard office equipment such as computers/keyboards/mice, printers, phones, mobile devices, photocopiers, filing cabinets, fax machines, etc. The noise level in the office work environment varies from moderate to loud. When traveling to client sites, the employee may be exposed to various unknown work environments.

Physical Demands

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job.

Light work. Exerting up to 20 pounds of force occasionally, and/or up to 10 pounds of force frequently, and/or a negligible amount of force constantly to move objects.

While performing the duties of this job, the employee is regularly required to talk or hear; sit; stand; walk; use hands to finger, handle or feel; grasp and/or reach with hands and arms; repetitive movements of the wrists, hands and/or fingers.

Specific vision abilities required by this job include close visual acuity and ability to adjust focus to perform an activity such as: preparing and analyzing data and figures; transcribing; viewing computer monitor(s); extensive reading; and legally operate a motor vehicle.

Work Schedule

This position may occasionally necessitate working additional hours and weekends outside of the employees regular work schedule.

Travel

Possible local and/or national US travel up to 10%.

This job description is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all duties, responsibilities, or qualifications associated with the job. Duties, responsibilities, requirements and qualifications may change at any time with or without notice.

Please, no phone calls or third party HR/staffing firms, agencies, individuals, etc.,The Brink’s name is a promise to respect the trust we’ve earned in over 150 years in business. Every employee honors that promise by offering the highest levels of service and support to our customers. We take pride in our work, and we share a passion about our future. Learn why so many people have made the choice to join our team – and stay here.

Job Title

Data Processing & Performance Analyst

Job Description

Brink’s Global Services is a division of Brink’s Inc, the world’s premier provider of secure logistics and security solutions in more than 122 countries across 5 continents. Brink’s Global Services specializes in the secure transportation and handling of valuable goods throughout the logistic value chain, from raw materials and components to finished products within the mining, banknote, precious metal, jewelry, security, art and pharmaceutical industries The company has a proud history of providing growth and advancement opportunities for its employees. We have a challenging opportunity for a Data Processing & Performance Analystbased out of our JFK, New York location.

Job Summary:
The Data Processing & Performance Analyst is responsible for overall data gathering, analysis, and administration of: operating procedural, metrics tracking, communication, and TQM & Lean Development initiatives. This position assists with the development and implementation of performance improvement initiatives and controls used in the US Brink’s Global Services (USBGS) network.

Key Responsibilities:
Serve as the primary contact in USBGS for all service-level communications with the USBGS network branches
Daily follow up with the network for coordination of operational activities
Daily management of key performance measures such as POD (Proof of Delivery)
Work closely and objectively with other department personnel to obtain system/process data in support of consolidated performance development
Data entry/data management at large scale
Participate in execution, implementation and monitoring of process improvement initiatives and performance metrics
Auditing of various regulatory compliance requirements and creation of document packets for Customers and relevant Authorities
Work with branches to ensure process efficiencies are implemented and maintained
Work with varies departments to assure that branches are providing acceptable levels of service
Conduct Inter-Company Charges (BTC) analysis, and report irregularities and other findings
Provide reports and analysis, including performance, financial and cost savings summaries
Develop process related training programs & materials for both USBGS and branch staff, and conduct on-going training/development initiatives
Travel to branch locations to conduct inquiries, analysis and audits
Perform other duties as assigned or necessary
About Brink’s


Brink’s is the global leader in security and logistics services, trusted by banks, financial institutions and businesses in both public and private sectors. We deliver the currency of the world to businesses in our communities. We do it because we’re needed. We do it because we’re trusted and valued. We do it because it makes us proud. Brink’s Proud.

What’s Next?


Thank you for considering applying for a job at Brink’s U.S. To be considered for this position, you must complete the entire application process, which includes answering all prescreening questions and providing your eSignature.

Upon completion of the application process, you will receive an email confirming that we have received your application. We will review all candidates and notify you of your status should we deem you fit for a job. Thank you again for your interest in a career at Brink’s U.S. For more information about future career opportunities, join our talent network, Like our Facebook page or Follow us on Twitter.

Brink’s is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability status, marital status, protected veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or history or any other characteristic protected by law. Brink’s is also committed to providing a drug free workplace.

We are an Equal Opportunity Employer and do not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, sex, age, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, status as a veteran, and basis of disability or any other federal, state or local protected class.,Job Requisition Number:81084

Were Bloomberg Enterprise Data - fast paced, innovative and expanding. We have worked hard and smart to become the $1bn business we are today. We partner closely with our clients, taking time to understand their unique businesses and individual data and technology needs. Our endless selection of datasets, covering all asset types, with multiple delivery technologies and flexible scheduling mean our clients are able to get exactly the data they need, when they need it, in the format they prefer. Without us, they simply cant operate.

What's the role?
In this role you will be working with the Bloomberg Enterprise Data Product Management Team specifically on Reference, Regulatory, Alternative and Pricing Data. We are constantly improving our products, to make them more feature rich and application ready, whilst reducing the total cost of ownership. Product Managers have a high level of business, communication, and technology skills, so that they can create working prototypes, specify Engineering tasks, and work effectively with Sales and Clients.

You will design, specify, and create prototypes of large and varied data models and data sets, both financial and non-financial, using a wide range of tools, methods and platforms.
We expect you to evaluate areas of interest, understand what is possible and commercially viable, recognize which models and concepts should be applied, and how the data resources should be acquired. An open, creative approach is critical to your success.

Whilst designing data for diverse addressable markets, you will explore and work with a wide range of data, and apply existing methods or develop new methods. You will also engage in data analysis in a practical way, convince business leaders that your results are worth investing in and educate other analysts and business team members.

Most critically, you will deliver the output of your data design to business users (both non-technical and technical) and will be a key person in shaping the product offering and the customer experience.

Well trust you to
Operate in an influential business role within a fast growing area.
Design and specify commercially attractive products.
Grow your business and technology skills.
Understand addressable markets.
Evaluate what is possible and viable.
Take responsibility for the Data Architecture of multiple data sets.
Work with Engineering, Product Managers, Sales, and Clients.
Youll need to have:
Experience with financial data
Familiar with specifying and using large structured data and data sets to solve complex business demands
Experience in working with Global Teams, across Sales, Technology, Operations and customers
The ability to address multiple priorities in an extremely fast-paced environment.
Legal authorization to work full-time in the United States and will not require visa sponsorship now or in the future
If this sounds like you:
Apply if you think we're a good match! We'll get in touch to let you know what the next steps are, but in the meantime feel free to have a look at this: https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/solution/data-and-content

We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, colour, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.,Job Description
Qualifications/Requirements • Associates Degree with two years of experience from an accredited college or university (OR a High School Diploma / GED from an accredited school or institution with a minimum 5+ years of experience)
• Must have strong computer skills, including data management and application software skills (Microsoft Office – Excel, PPT, Word, and Access).
• Programming skills a plus.
• Desired to have a working knowledge of global environmental and regulatory compliance initiatives including RoHS, REACH, WEEE, Battery registrations, and take back programs.
• Desired to have a working knowledge of Engineering change process and MRP systems (SAP, EHSM, and GTS) module for TR&S.
• Strong interpersonal and written & verbal communication skills.
• Strong organizational and leadership skills.
• Project Management Skills.
• Team player with a global perspective
• Self-motivated, must be able to multi-task in a dynamic environment and handle pressure from project schedule and technical challenge.

• Meticulous attention to detail.
Desired Characteristics
• Significant environmental compliance and regulatory experience (WEEE, REACH & RoHS)
• Familiarity with Conflict Minerals legislation.
• Experience with GE Inspection Technologies products, or experience in the Oil and Gas industry,SOFT's client located in New York, NY is looking for a Financial Data Analyst - Accounting for a contract assignment.

Qualifications:
Strong analytical skills and knowledge of internal controls and accounting operations
Experience with Excel macros, SQL queries a plus
Ability to interact effectively with colleagues across staff units
Strong verbal and written communication skills
Bachelor degree in accounting or finance, or similar education CPA a plus
Min of Three-Seven years of relevant work experience such as Fund Accounting, Product Controllers or Public Accounting with knowledge or experiences with one or more of the following fixed income products:
Corporates,
ABS,
commercial paper,
municipals,
US Treasuries
Responsibilities:
The Corporate Controllers team is responsible for the accounting and financial reporting related to the Special Purpose Vehicles (LLCs or Facilities) established by the Bank in response to the COVID-19.
This role supports the Bank’s Controllers accounting and financial reporting team and the Markets Group. Responsible for performing and reviewing operational processing, accounting and reporting activities including the production of annual audited financial statements for each of the LLCs.
Job Type: Contract

Schedule:
Monday to Friday,Our client, a leading global financial services company, has approximately 200 million customer accounts and does business in more than 140 countries. They provide consumers, corporations, governments and institutions with financial products and services, including consumer banking and credit, corporate and investment banking, securities brokerage, transaction services, and wealth management. Description Content Data Business Analyst- must have the presentations, strategy definition and businesstech content creation skills- big data is a plus. Resumes that include a sample is HIGHLY preferred. Experienced in presenting Business Tech strategy in the financial services domain or financial firms Specialize in the development of product based material and convert Technology delivery into Business value-add material Convert technical documentation and jargon into business material Create powerful business documentation on all its innovations, technology synergies, and technology improvements, and enhancements, technology team product collaterals, comprehensive manuals, SharePoint content, demo videos, and much more. PowerPoint presentations covering Technical and functional flows, Senior level management reporting, Program, and Project level updates, solution concepts, process documents, architectural flows and many more, Product Introductions, Success Stories-Case Studies, Technical Editing-Proofreading, Technical Manuals Hardware Software Installation Guides, Administrator Guides, User Guides, White Papers on Technology Innovations and Support, Product features summaries, competitive analysis with internal and external technology offerings and products Brochures, Technology Product Overviews, Newsletters, Training guides, Demonstration Scripts Ability to multi-task numerous duties efficiently Demonstrated capabilities in data collection and reporting Ability to effectively influence peers, business partners, vendors and employees at all levels Proven ability to anticipate and identify emerging trends in how people communicate Evaluating large volumes of summary- or detail-level data from varying sources and present actionable feedback about the findings to management and other project stakeholders using both well-established and creative techniques to analyze data and make recommendations Seeking to understand and resolve issues employing reasoning and good judgment remaining objective and solution oriented. - Managing stakeholders and communicating effectively Demonstrate high individual performance desire to work as a cohesive team. Ability to manage several independent tasks with limited direction, and the ability to maintain a strong commitment to a global team Demonstrate critical thinking skills, solid problem solving skills and excellent oral and written communication skills - Proficiency with Microsoft Office suite required. Proficiency with web based systems such as SharePoint preferred. Preferred Technical Skills PC Software POWERPOINT, MS Office Suite, MS Visio, MS Project, MS SharePoint DB Applications MS Access and Oracle Business Intelligence Exposure Business Objects, Knowledge of Data Management Data Warehouse, QlikView, Tableau Any Data Modeling, and collaboration Tools 141508 Please see our complete list of jobs at www.rmscorp.com,TECHNICAL SKILLS REQUIRED middot Strong knowledge of Microsoft Office Suite. Advance to expert skill level in Excel. middot Demonstrated ability to use Excel to combine and analyze data from various sources and generate reports and graphics . Must be able to combine large volumes of data for consolidated reporting. middot High level of proficiency with advanced formulas, dynamic ranges, advanced charting, and slicers. middot Demonstrated capability of Excel Power Pivot, Slicer functionality, DAX calculation is a must middot Power BI a plus. middot Scripting a plus.,Our client, a leading global financial services company, has approximately 200 million customer accounts and does business in more than 140 countries. They provide consumers, corporations, governments and institutions with financial products and services, including consumer banking and credit, corporate and investment banking, securities brokerage, transaction services, and wealth management.

Financial Capital Markets Business Analyst, with Program Management and Data Analysis skills
Seeking a talented Business Analyst (Financial Capital Markets domain) with Program Management and Data Analysis skills for a suite of Regulatory Reporting Applications.

Key Responsibilities
-Business Analysis
-Analyzing Requirements
-Documenting Functional Specifications
-Documenting Test cases
-Data Analysis
-Process Re-engineering
-Project Status Tracking & Reporting
-Facilitate project planning
-Track projects, and report status
-Identify/Track Scope changes, Issues, Risks & Dependencies
-Administrative
-Facilitating team meetings and team building activities
-Maintaining Team websites (wiki, jive, etc.)
Qualifications
-8+ years of experience as a Business Analyst in Financial Capital Markets
-In-depth knowledge of OTC Derivatives Trade Lifecycle for atleast 2 of the asset classes (Rates, FX, Equity, Commodities)
-Excellent Data Analysis skills using one or more the tools preferred: MS Excel, Textpad, MS Access, SQL (Oracle/Postgres/MYSQL/other), Qlikview, Tableau
-Experience in Regulatory Reporting projects is a plus
-CFA certification will be a plus
-Project management Skills
-Project Planning, Status tracking/reporting, Project Financials management
-Scrum/Kanban
-Advanced skills in administering JIRA and Confluence will be a plus
-PMP certification will be a plus
-Ability to comprehend/digest complex information and summarize in a clear/concise fashion
-Advanced skills in creating slick status reports and dashboards using Excel / Powerpoint
-Advanced Excel skills including writing macros
-Qlikview or Tableau skills will be a plus
-Ability to manage and communicate with senior executive stakeholders
-Experience in communicating with Internal Audit, Compliance, or Regulators will be a plus



Please see our complete list of jobs at:
www.rmscorp.com,Our client, a leading global financial services company, has approximately 200 million customer accounts and does business in more than 140 countries. They provide consumers, corporations, governments and institutions with financial products and services, including consumer banking and credit, corporate and investment banking, securities brokerage, transaction services, and wealth management.

Description:

Business Data Analyst with strong SQL skills

Data Analysis, Financial Products basics, Hands on SQL, some Big Data exposure, Messaging formats- hands on data, iterface work, worked with large systems- SQL- working with data

Candidate has the opportunity to be a contributor to the Global Bank's Markets Data Strategy and contribute towards the goal of increasing revenue by providing key analytics/MIS/metrics for decision making, whilst also improving regulatory quality and accuracy. The candidate will work directly with bright and innovative individuals on both the business and technology side, giving broad exposure to front-to-back trade processing and electronic trading across all asset classes. By being part of the broader strategy, the candidate can also gain exposure to Big Data ecosystems, Google Cloud Architecture & Data Science on one of the largest Data Repositories across the street.
Key Responsibilities:
Develop Subject Matter Expertise on the key data elements that are consumed for reporting data to external and internal clients
Ensure adherence to and develop best practices supporting Client's Project Management Standards
Ensure the business reporting needs are met with the most elegant and timely technology solutions
Ensuring proper development life cycle is followed with artefacts to support Internal Audit and any inquiries
Gather business requirements, perform detailed analysis, and produce associated functional specifications across multiple functions.
Go-live support, investigation of issues.
Participation in large-scale "highly-visible” SIT/UAT testing cycles managing technology and business stakeholders
Partner with business & technology leads globally to deliver an E2E solution.
Partner with business, technology and quant stakeholders to suggest innovative solutions to existing issues
Produce implementation approach, timelines, go-live strategy.
Project management & oversight of the deliverables & resources distributed across many different technology teams across the front to back application stack.
Provide regular updates to senior management in technology, middle office & front office
Training of relevant teams prior to go-live of new business processes/products, functionality or applications
Work as lead business analyst/project manager in the team supporting reporting for external and internal clients
Work with Data Governance and Quality teams to understand data issues
Work with technology leads across various teams to accomplish the reporting objective
Work with various technology leads to ensure the gaps in the data completeness or accuracy are converted into prioritized Book of Work items
Qualifications:
Exceptional candidates who do not meet these criteria may be considered for the role provided they have the necessary skills and experience.
10+ years of business data analysis experience in large technology ecosystems
Significant Business Analysis experience across the full project lifecycle (requirements, design, development, testing and deployment).
Experience with Global Markets, Private Bank, Payments or Securities Services Product Knowledge preferred. Other general Financial Services experience should be coupled with other qualifications in this list.
Any understanding of regulatory constraints and experience in delivering regulatory projects is extremely desirable (MiFID II, SFTR, SDRE (EMIR, CFTC, Volcker, etc.) but not mandatory
Front, Middle and Back Office exposure, if any, will be required
Exceptional skills on Microsoft Office – Excel, Word, Project, Visio, PowerPoint.
Should be highly analytical and be able to individually to produce needed insights from the data.
Strong SQL with experience working with RDBMS such as Oracle, Sybase, Netezza expected
Experience working with teams supporting Business Intelligence platforms such as Tableau, QlikView, Microstrategy, will be a plus
A history of delivering against agreed objectives
Any applications development experience will be helpful. If not as a developer, experience
Ability to leverage strong interpersonal collaboration skills in a fast-paced team environment
Ability to multi-task and work under pressure
Ability to pick up new concepts and apply the knowledge.
Comfortable in presenting suggestions for change and or improving work flow
Demonstrated leadership skills at the selected level
Enthusiastic and proactive approach with willingness to learn
Excellent analytical and process-based skills, i.e. process flow diagrams, business modelling, and functional design;
Excellent communication skills (there is a requirement to be Business facing)
Excellent organizational and multi-tasking skills with tremendous attention to detail
Familiarity or the ability to quickly understand and formulate application level requirements pertaining to complex workflows, or integration with external applications
Problem-solving and facilitation skills
Proficient at writing and delivering business requirement documents and presentations
Proven delivery record of multiple projects involving process change and technology enhancements.
Proven interpersonal skills with ability to partner and influence across organizational lines
Self-motivation and prioritization of tasks and actions to hit deadlines according to business priorities
The candidate is expected to be dynamic, flexible with a high energy level as this is a demanding and rapidly changing environment
Thoroughness and organization is expected, as well as sound judgment
141478

Please see our complete list of jobs at:
www.rmscorp.com,Current position is Full Time with the End Client MUST skills - Power Pivo, DAX calculation, Power BI Description of Position The candidate will be a part of our Technology Group. The Data Analyst collaborate with various team members across the firm to understand business needs and identify how technology can meet those needs through the design and implementation of efficient and standardized use of Excel Power Pivot based reporting connected into Qlik Infrastructure. Data Analysts work with Business Analysts and Stakeholders to understand the business problem we are solving for and the intended outcome. They strategize on the approach, collaborate on requirement definitions and partner with the Development Team to test and deploy the solution. RESPONSIBILITIES The Excel Data Analyst will be responsible for bullCreating, implementing, and maintaining data file structures. bullEnsuring procedures are being properly documented. bullProviding ad-hoc reporting in response to client specific requests bullRefining and automating regular processes, tracking issues and documenting changes. bullAssisting other analysts with complex query tuning and schema refinement. KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITIES bullMinimum of three to five years of advanced Microsoft Excel work experience combining and analyzing data from various sources, and generating reports and graphics bullKnowledge of Excel Power Pivot, Slicer functionality, DAX calculation is a must bullKnowledge of Accounting a plus bullKnowledge of Business Intelligence tools and Data normalizations a plus bullStrong analytical skills and technical orientation. bullStrong customer service orientation with the ability to interface with all levels within our clients' organizations. bullDemonstrated attention to detail with reliable time management, follow through skills. bullExcellent written and verbal communication. bullAbility to be flexible and adapt to change quickly. bullMust possess a strong sense of teamwork and the ability to effectively collaborate with others. Ability to work well in a team environment. bullHigh level of accountability and ownership. Ability to "get-it-done" and follow through. bullAbility to organize, plan and prioritize work with a high level of independence and autonomy. bullAbility to work in a rapidly changing environment and wear a variety of hats. Demonstrated ability to effectively multi-task and context switch effectively between different activities and teams. bullEnergy industry experience a plus,Our client, a leading global financial services company, has approximately 200 million customer accounts and does business in more than 140 countries. They provide consumers, corporations, governments and institutions with financial products and services, including consumer banking and credit, corporate and investment banking, securities brokerage, transaction services, and wealth management. The Capital Markets Data Strategy team is building a next generation Data Fabric to solve the evolving Business, Analytical and Regulatory needs of a Major Global Bank's Client. The Fabric will bring together disparate data sources for the Global Markets Institutional Clients organization and enable industry-leading analytics, client reporting, regulatory, surveillance, supervisory reporting(s) and data science solutions. One of the data sources ndash Market Data will support Transaction Monitoring capability within the 1st Line of Defence (1LOD) to ensure appropriate risk-based global coverage of market manipulation and abuse behaviours, complementing the 2nd Line of Defence (2LOD) Trade Surveillance function. The ideal candidate will have some Financial Services knowledge as well as a deep background in dealing with Market Data across asset classes like Equities, Rates, and FX etc. Experience working with known Market Data vendors like Reuters, Bloomberg etc. is a huge plus. The candidate will work closely with the product owner, other Business Analysts, Internal partner system teams, System Architects, Data Scientists and core developers. Strong analytical and stakeholder management skills are essential to help integrate Market Data with the Architecture. Please see our complete list of jobs at www.rmscorp.com,Position SummaryA data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area. Job Responsibilities: Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis Learn new data related skills and processes Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis Share and teach skills to others on the data team Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients . Skillset Required: •A College degree (required) •5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required) •Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data •MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required) •Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired) •Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics •Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction •Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers •Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss •Passion about our mission to improve peoples lives •Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment,Job Description
Paladin Consulting is currently hiring a PWM Performance Team Analyst to join our team working onsite at our client's office located in Salt Lake City, UT.

We work with companies that offer environments for our employees to contribute, learn, and advance their career. We treat you like you are part of the family.

Job Title: PWM Performance Team Analyst
Work Location: Salt Lake City, UT
Duration: 6 month contract with option to extend
Education/Experience Required: Bachelor's degree required

Job Description:
The Performance team works closely with Private Wealth Management Business, Compliance, Technology, and other Operations teams globally to maintain firm-wide performance data. The team is responsible for ensuring performance figures are accurate and implementing solutions to correct returns when necessary. Additionally, team members are the primary point of contact for global PWM performance questions.

Responsibilities:
Prepare to gain a comprehensive understanding of the various performance methodologies in the PWM systems
Showcase your client service skills as you partner with PWM Business to ensure client's performance needs are being met in a timely and satisfactory manner
Apply your quantitative skills as you conduct root cause analysis and resolution for performance return discrepancies
Liaise with PWM Compliance, Technology, and other Operation teams to ensure accurate performance data is reported on the PWM Desktop, Client Web, and monthly client statements
Leverage your risk-management skills to successfully adhere to current controls while identifying areas where additional controls could be put in place
Skills & Qualifications:
Bachelor's degree
Strong communication and interpersonal skills
Proven analytical and problem solving ability
Ability to multi-task and prioritize accordingly
MS Office (Excel/Word/PowerPoint) proficiency
Ability to work effectively in a team environment
Ability to work independently and as a self-starter, as appropriate
Strong control focus and attention to detail
Previous Operations experience preferred
For more information or to view other opportunities, visit us at www.paladininc.com.

Paladin Consulting is an EEOC employer.
Company Description
Paladin Consulting is a leading Staffing and Recruiting provider based in Dallas. We have been staffing and recruiting talent for Fortune 500 companies for 30+ years. Talk with us today about staffing and recruiting opportunities. We always welcome great recruiters and partner with staffing service providers to make sure our clients get the talent they need.,Come work at a place where innovation and teamwork come together to support the most exciting missions in the world!

About Shape Security:

We are security and web experts, pioneers, evangelists, and elite researchers. We believe in the power of the Internet to be a positive force; our mission is to protect every website and mobile app from cybercriminals. Shape’s founders fought cybercrime at the Pentagon, Google, and other leading security companies. Come be a part of our unparalleled team that is responsible for making the Internet a safer place for everyone.

Position Summary:

Shape Security is seeking a driven, analytical and highly professional individual who is looking to take on new challenges as an analyst in our Threat Intelligence team.

This role has an engaging mix of data analytics and customer/business engagement. It involves big data analysis and presentations to executive audiences, as well as production of marketing collateral, hosting webinars, co-authoring industry papers and assisting the Sales team by presenting to prospective and POC customers.

If you have a passion for deriving actionable insights from complex big data sets, love to work with intricate statistical analysis, and want to be a subject matter expert (SME) in web and mobile security, then we’d love to talk with you.

Customer-Facing Responsibilities:
Detailed big data analysis of the web and mobile traffic of Global 2000 organizations and produce intelligence reports/presentations for their senior management.
Provide ad-hoc data analysis for customers on an as and when basis.
Provide thought leadership to existing and prospective clients on how to better secure themselves and their customers by sharing learnings from other Shape deployments and research.
Work cross-functionally to guide the future of our analytics product.
Marketing-Focused Responsibilities:
Become a subject matter expert through exposure to Shape’s proprietary data and internal teams.
Assist marketing with the production of blog articles, hosting of webinars and provision of data for marketing campaigns and research papers.
Speak at industry and internal conferences to share results of analysis and research.
Provide on-boarding training for new Shape Sales Executives.
Requirements:
5+ years analytical experience working with large-scale datasets.
Excellent communication and presentation skills.
Strong interpersonal skills, personable, and persistent.
Strong proficiency in SQL and/or Python.
A demonstrated enthusiasm and capacity to learn new technologies quickly.
Relevant academic qualifications.
The Job Description is intended to be a general representation of the responsibilities and requirements of the job. However, the description may not be all-inclusive, and responsibilities and requirements are subject to change.

Equal Employment Opportunity

It is the policy of F5 to provide equal employment opportunities to all employees and employment applicants without regard to unlawful considerations of race, religion, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, age, sensory, physical, or mental disability, marital status, veteran or military status, genetic information, or any other classification protected by applicable local, state, or federal laws. This policy applies to all aspects of employment, including, but not limited to, hiring, job assignment, compensation, promotion, benefits, training, discipline, and termination. Reasonable accommodation is available for qualified individuals with disabilities, upon request.,The Product Strategy Group works to ensure the Company offers competitive products that provide growth and profitability. The group performs a wide range of analytics and uses both internal and external data sources to achieve these ends. We interact and provide guidance primarily to Product, Marketing & Finance.
As the Company expands its product offerings, there are rapidly growing needs to use both external and internal data sources to ensure optimal financial and operational performance. The Product Data Analyst is a highly skilled and proficient in their discipline which adds value to the organization. The role will focus on internal data sources, ensuring we have access to the required data and are using effective reports to monitor and interpret this data.
Company Perks:
Competitive pay, 401k with company match, Medical, Dental and Vision Insurance, Employee Stock Purchase Plan, Educational Reimbursement, Commuter benefits, Discount programs, Inventor patent bonuses
Stamps Company Overview:
Stamps.com (NASDAQ: STMP) is the leading provider of postage online and shipping software solutions to customers including consumers, small businesses, e-commerce shippers, enterprises, and high volume shippers. Stamps.com offers solutions that help businesses run their shipping operations more smoothly and function more successfully under the brand names Stamps.com, Endicia®, ShipStation®, ShipEngine®, ShippingEasy®, ShipWorks®, GlobalPost and MetaPack™. Stamps.com’s family of brands provides seamless access to mailing and shipping services through integrations with more than 500 unique partner applications.

Primary Objectives:
Ensure Product, Operations and Product Strategy groups have timely access to reliable data to make critical, real-time business decisions
Develop a strong working relationship with the Company’s Business Intelligence group; serve as the primarily liaison between the above-mentioned groups and BI
Drive the data reporting strategy for these groups; develop reports to the specifications of these teams; and evaluate appropriate software tools to most efficiently meet team needs
Essential Position Duties:
Acquire, clean, and structure data from multiple sources; analyze data to discover and interpret trends, patterns, and relationships. Working across departments, help us ensure data quality and present data in a way that makes it easy to communicate among different groups.
Master large data sets with SQL and Tableau
Build dashboards and reports, presenting key insights and ensuring data driven actions to improve the business
Seek out improvements in current internal reporting and performance monitoring to drive more accuracy, better insights, and more streamlined processes
Perform other duties as assigned

Additional Job Duties:
Sit for prolonged periods of time
Utilize wrist and hands for a prolonged period of time
Walk short distances
Stand for short periods
Speaking and conversing with others
Lift up to 25lbs without assistance up to chest height
Education and/or Experience:
Bachelor degree, preferably in a quantitative/analytical field.
Four or more (4+) years of relevant experience.
Skills and Knowledge:
Excellent analytical and fact-based problem solving skills, including ability to analyze large amounts of data and be able to make recommendations based on identification of trend and gaps along with creating forecasts based on historical data.
Excellent analytical and fact-based problem solving skills, with strong attention to detail.
Must be a self-starter and ready to work in an intense but fun environment with our existing team of marketing professionals.
Strong communication and relationship-building skills.
Self-motivated individual who is able to prioritize and multi-task.
Works well under pressure and able to meet tight deadlines.
Ability to conduct complex work under minimal supervision and with wide latitude for independent judgement.
Computer/Software/Application Proficiency:
Advanced Excel user, with strong SQL knowledge
Experience with visualization software such as Tableau required
Travel Requirements:
None anticipated
Equal Opportunity Employer/Veterans/Disabled
#LI-KD1,Job Description
Required Skills:
• Experience in Data Design, Dimensional Modelling, Jira
• Understanding of data design techniques
• Ability to work in agile development environment
• Knowledge of Teradata, HiveQL, Hadoop HDFS
Company Description
Saicon has 20+ Years of IT Staffing and Consulting Experience. Headquartered in Overland, KS, we have 9 Offices Nationwide and have 3 Global Delivery locations. Saicon Specializes and has rich experience filling various type of job roles (Both IT & Non IT) in Retail, Consumer Products and Brands, Insurance, Logistics and Travel, Banking and Financials, Manufacturing, Healthcare and Life Sciences, Telecom, Media & Entertainment, Professional Services, Government and Public Sector.,Posted: Jun 24, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200164872
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, new ideas have a way of becoming extraordinary products, services, and customer experiences very quickly. You bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

Apple is in search of an experienced Digital Media Data Analyst to join the Apple Services Digital Marketing team in Culver City, California to help improve our marketing strategies for Apple TV+. As a Media Analyst you will develop compelling and actionable insights through quantitative analysis, innovative thinking, and storytelling with data. You are interested in the future of Video and Streaming services. You want to work on determining what Streaming Video content launch benchmarks are, help find strategies hit them through marketing, and all the while help to optimize evergreen marketing initiatives.

You will work closely with the analytics, media activation, and campaign strategy teams to identify reporting needs, automate recurrent requests, interpret data trends, and propose changes to improve the quality and granularity of the information that is processed. You will provide ongoing measurement guidance to better communicate concise data insights, trends and measurement strategies to broad internal audiences from technical experts to traditional brand managers and internal stakeholders.
Key Qualifications
5+ years of experience in a Data Analyst role, with emphasis on digital paid media metrics
Ability to code in SQL, Python or R
Thorough understanding of digital media metrics, both from a brand and direct response perspective - digital subscription business experience is a plus
Strong understanding of Streaming Service User Acquisition
Strong understanding of Video Streaming Service competitive landscape
Strong working knowledge of digital advertising: executional workflow, measurement, research, optimization and testing methodologies
Functional, working knowledge of digital advertising platforms such as DCM/Sizmek and media network/DSP platforms (e.g. TTD, DBM, OATH, Adobe)
Excellent written and verbal communication skills and keen ability to synthesize complex data points for audiences of varied digital media expertise
Proficiency in excel, keynote, and data visualization platforms (e.g. Tableau)
Description
You will be responsible for creating and delivering custom reporting for campaigns running through the internal media activation team, surfacing actionable insights to help inform optimization. You will also work closely with the analytics team and campaign strategy teams to ensure that all information shared in automated reporting visulization dashboards is accurate. In concert with the media activation team, you will help develop media testing and optimization plans, making measurement recommendations that correlate to campaign objectives. Beyond these ongoing responsibilities, you will also perform adhoc data analysis and maintain benchmarking media points across digital media channels.
Education & Experience
Bachelor’s degree - ideally in an analytical field such as Economics, Statistics, Mathematics, Software Engineering, Finance, Applied Sciences, etc.,Overview

About Pulse8, Inc.

Pulse8 is an innovative Healthcare Analytics and Technology Company that delivers visibility and transparency for Risk Adjustment and Quality Management programs. We enable health plans and at-risk providers to achieve the greatest financial impact in the Health Insurance Exchange (HIX), Medicare Advantage, and Medicaid markets. By combining advanced analytic methodologies with extensive health plan experience, Pulse8 has developed a suite of uniquely pragmatic solutions that are revolutionizing risk adjustment. Pulse8's flexible business intelligence tools offer real-time visibility into member and provider activities so our clients can apply the most cost-effective and appropriate interventions for closing gaps in documentation, coding, and quality.

What's cool about working for Pulse8? We're a close-knit team of Healthcare and Technology experts dedicated to helping people live longer, healthier lives. You'll get to help us design and build innovative solutions from the ground up and have the opportunity to do lots of interesting things in an entrepreneurial culture. We offer competitive benefits and much, much more!

Position Description

Healthcare Data Analyst will assist our team of data scientists, researchers, risk adjustment experts, and developers in implementation support, leading business cases for algorithm development and improvement, researching customer queries of analytics performance, creating requirements for new analytics and data products, and working in tandem with our data teams in executing these requirements.

This is a remote position.

Responsibilities
Developing business cases and requirements for new products and current product enhancements
Leading customer requests for ad hoc reporting or research
Owning customer financial improvement modeling and engaging directly with current or new customers to update models
Leading research initiatives to monitor Pulse8's algorithm performance over time and recommend future enhancements
Collaborate with Pulse8 clinicians in outcomes, algorithm performance, and new product development
Develop customer presentations and reporting enhancements to streamline Pulse8 operations and support processes
Provide data support and subject matter expertise knowledge during implementation phase of customer onboarding
Qualifications

Academic and Professional Qualifications:
Bachelor's degree in a related field of study
4 to 6 years of experience analyzing and interpreting health care data
Experience supporting the development of scalable analytic and reporting solutions
Experience:

Minimum Essential Knowledge / Skills:
4 to 6 years of experience analyzing and interpreting health care data
Experience supporting the development of scalable analytic and reporting solutions
Prior experience in healthcare industry specifically Medicaid
Experience with financial or operational modeling and concepts
Experience or degree in statistics, mathematics, finance, operational reporting or similar analytic field
Experience interacting with large amounts of healthcare data
Experience working with clinical classification systems like CDPS,CRG,ACG,ERG
Experience with SQL or SAS
Working knowledge of statistics with ability/interest to become proficient
Proven technical, analytical and problem solving
Strong written and verbal communication
Professional and interpersonal
Self-initiative and leadership
Ability to work within a team environment
Ability to interface with both external and internal personnel at all levels
Desired Skills:
Experience with Risk Adjustment models specifically Medicaid focused
Medicaid business analytics experience
Experience with business intelligence tools
Travel requirements:
No to minimal travel
Will travel to Annapolis, MD for new hire orientation and then all Pulse 8 employees attend two company summits per year in various locations.
Working arrangements:
Monday through Friday or as defined by assignment requirements
Pulse8 is a stand-alone brand, fully owned by Allscripts, with its own C-level and senior leadership. When you work for Pulse8, you get the advantages and benefits of working with a large, public company with the innovative culture and direction and of a small, nimble company.

At Allscripts, our greatest strength comes from bringing together talented people with diverse perspectives to support the technology needs of 180,000 physicians, 1,500 hospitals and 10,000 post-acute organizations across the globe. Allscripts offers a comprehensive compensation and benefits package, including holidays, vacation, medical, dental, and vision insurance, company paid life insurance and retirement savings.

Allscripts' policy is to provide equal employment opportunity and affirmative action in all of its employment practices without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, protected veteran status, age, individuals with disabilities, sexual orientation or gender identity or expression or any other legally protected category. Applicants for North American based positions with Allscripts must be legally authorized to work in the United States or Canada. Verification of employment eligibility will be required as a condition of hire.

#LI-ALL

From a "VEVRAA Federal Contractor" We request Priority Referral of Protected Veterans,Client is seeking to add a Data Analyst to staff the Enterprise Data Services team reporting to the Life and Health Enterprise Services Delivery Leader. This position is responsible for the development and maintenance of data warehouse and analytical environments to support financial, management and statutory reporting requirements along with enhancing and facilitating corporate decision-making capabilities. Position Responsibilities middot Independently work with business customers and members of the EDS team to create solutions that support reporting, analytic and warehouse needs using the appropriate platforms and tools. middot Analyze business requirements and work with client areas to produce functional specifications for use as reference in creation of reporting and analytical solutions. middot Perform the first level of testing for a new andor enhanced functionality and provide support for user acceptance testing. middot Analyze source data to understand relationships and determine business rules. middot Assist in designing the data warehouse and assure that data is stored and maintained in consistent formats. middot Create source to target mapping documents to transform the source data into the target warehouse and test final transformations. middot Develop andor maintain relationships with business customers to identify and acquire additional data sources to incorporate into the warehouse. middot Train and assist users with retrieving data from the warehouse. middot Provide guidance in the creation of reporting and analytical solutions. Position Qualifications middot Requires a bachelorrsquos degree or equivalent certifications in technical system design. middot 4+ years of experience developing data warehouse solutions preferably within the insurance industry. middot Sound understanding of data warehouse best practices, relational data structures and dimensional data modeling. middot Strong knowledge of current relational database and big data software and query concepts middot Advanced SQL skills middot Experience supporting large scale Enterprise Data Warehouses middot Ability to analyze and solve complex problems and to work independently on multiple tasks middot Must be able to communicate effectively verbally and in writing with technical and non-technical associates About the Company Peterson Technology Partners (PTP) httpptechpartners.com has been Chicago's premier Information Technology (IT) staffing, consulting, and recruiting firm for over 22+ years. Named after Chicago's historic Peterson Avenue, PTP has built its reputation by developing lasting relationships, leading digital transformation, and inspiring technical innovation throughout Chicagoland. Based in Park Ridge, IL, PTP's 250+ employees have a narrow focus on a single market (Chicago) and expertise in 4 innovative technical areas Artificial IntelligenceMachine LearningData Science RoboticsRobotic Process Automation (RPA) CyberDataInformation Security DevOpsDevSecOps PTP httpswww.ptechpartners.comblog exists to ensure that all of our partners (clients and candidates alike) make the best hiring and career decisions. Connect LinkedIn httpslinkedin.comcompanypeterson-technology-partners Facebook httpswww.facebook.comPetersonTechnologyPartners Twitter httpstwitter.comPTPChicago YouTube httpswww.youtube.comchannelUC2RbatuBB1G86fmD1wp8KPA All Social Links httpsallmylinks.comptpchicago Review Google httpsgoo.glmapsWAM3m8YPxtn Glassdoor httpswww.glassdoor.comOverviewWorking-at-Peterson-Technology-Partners-EIIE714978.11,39.htm Yelp httpswww.yelp.combizpeterson-technology-partners-park-ridge All Review Links httpsallmylinks.comptpchicago Listen iTunes httpspodcasts.apple.comuspodcastrecruiters-get-real-it-career-questions-tech-job-tipsid1486245664 Spotify httpsopen.spotify.comshow1YneryOs3bQEjsH8JGh374 Stitcher httpswww.stitcher.compodcastmatty-bv3recruiters-get-real-it-career-questions-tech-job-tips-and All Podcast Links httpsallmylinks.comrecruitersgetrealpodcast Apply Stack Overflow httpsstackoverflow.comjobscompaniespeterson-technology-partners Dice ..company10123255 LinkedIn httpswww.linkedin.comcompanypeterson-technology-partnersjobs?viewAsMembertrue Glassdoor httpswww.glassdoor.comJobsPeterson-Technology-Partners-Jobs-E714978.htm All Job Openings httpbit.lyPTPChicagoJobs,Role Type: Data Analyst

Reports To: Chief Technology Officer

*
About Us

CareAdvisors is a technology company that helps patients get access to healthcare and social service benefits they need by automating the manual enrollment role taken on by hospitals.

Many patients who receive care at hospitals are eligible for Medicaid and other social service benefits, but some have barriers to enroll or re-enroll in their benefits. Using technology focused on automation, CareAdvisors remove barriers so that patients can get access to the benefits they need.

Our Customer Relationship Management tool empowers care navigators and social workers with a platform that is connected to a network of community resources and hospitals. We use the data gathered across our network to power our analytics engine. Join us in building out our platform so we can connect people to the care they need!

About the Role

As a Data Analyst, you will research and develop predictive models for population health. Overall, you will support our enterprise strategy and delivery of analytic services by performing various analyses and interpretations to support business needs for assigned functions. The analyst will collaborate across analytic teams, business partners, and customers to ensure a coordinated flow of information, documentation, and relationships to support the delivery of leading-edge analytics. Due to the dynamic nature of this role, we are looking for entrepreneurial candidates with the ability to derive analytical insights from a variety of business contexts.

Responsibilities
Compile analytical and statistical reports.
Formulate, define, and recommend scope of reports.
Review information for accuracy and reconcile data.
Provide support and education to staff on how to access reports and interpret the data.
Synthesize raw data into digestible and actionable information.
Identify trends and make recommendations for quality and operational improvement.
Collaborate with leaders to understand key value drivers and challenges within their business units and determine the key metrics and insights that can help improve performance as a result.
Continually think of new ways that data-driven insights can help support Care Advisors.
We are looking for a team member with the following background
Currently based in the Chicagoland area (REQUIRED!)
BS or BA degree in business, economics, finance, accounting, marketing analytics, MIS, computer science, engineering, or equivalent work experience.
2 years of related experience in an internship or full-time role guiding strategic decision making using data and analytics.
Experience working in a healthcare or startup environment, preferred.
Experience with topics in public health, population health, social determinants of health, data science, or social science, preferred.
Experience with report/dashboard development, data/report automation, self-service capabilities, data design and integration, data quality and governance, preferred.
SQL, Python, and/or Tableau skills are preferred.
Familiar with predictive programming in R and/or Python.
Proficiency in Microsoft Excel, Powerpoint and Word.
Ability to take insights and turn them into actionable steps that can drive business value.
At Care Advisors we value diversity and endeavor to treat everyone with respect, no matter their age, gender, race, ethnicity, or sexual, cultural or ideological preferences.

Due to the unprecedented situation of COVID-19, CareAdvisors has decided to protect our current and future employees by managing our business remotely. This is inclusive of interviewing, onboarding, and daily operations. Please consider that our roles will not be remote long-term and we will return to an office environment once it is deemed safe to do so following the guidance of local health authorities and the Centers for Disease Control.

*

Job Type: Full-time

Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Experience:
healthcare or startup environment: 1 year (Preferred)
data and analytics: 2 years (Required)
Education:
Bachelor's (Required)
Location:
Chicago, IL 60654 (Required)
Work Location:
One location
Benefit Conditions:
Waiting period may apply
Work Remotely:
No,Hi,

Greetings from HR Pundits!!!

We have the high priority contract position for one of our Direct Client. If interested share profiles asap

Title: Data Scientist - Sr. Analyst
Location: Lake Forest, IL
Duration:6Months
(only GC/GC EAD/C)

Job Description:

The Data Scientist – Sr. Analyst will work on the SRG product recommendation engine for their eCommerce site. This person will be required to have good communication, the ability to understand business problems and use cases and have three or more years of relevant experience

Skills
Mandatory Technical Skills: R, Python, machine learning algorithms, Hadoop
Nice to have technical skills: Scala, Spark

Duties,If you are a current Motorola Solutions employee, please click this link to apply through your Workday account.
Company Overview


At Motorola Solutions, we create technologies our customers refer to as their lifeline. Our technology platforms in communications, software, video and services help our customers work safely and more efficiently. Whether it’s helping firefighters see through smoke, enabling police officers to see around street corners, or reliably keeping the lights on in homes and businesses around the world, our work supports those who put their lives on the line to keep us safe. Bring your passion, potential and talents to Motorola Solutions, and help us usher in a new era in public safety and security.


Department Overview
Motorola Solutions Inc

Job Description


Create innovative dashboard and business analytics. Maintain managerial reporting for the
product and service organization, as well as other key stakeholder organizations. Partner with
finance and operational stakeholders to provide timely and accurate analytics, reports, and
dashboards, including but not limited to P &L reporting, headcount and operational expenses
analyses, ASP and CPU analysis, order, backlogs, and cost of delivery analyses. Maintain the
product P&L structure and drive continuous reporting process improvement. Develop modeling
tools to provide efficient financial data that will aid in key decision making. Design and
deployment of Tableau closely partnering with finance and other functional stake holders and
provide vital information to support ad-hoc analysis.


Basic Requirements


Bachelor's and 5 years of experience
Degree Field: Business or finance


Travel Requirements
Under 10%

Relocation Provided
None

Position Type
Experienced

Referral Payment Plan
No

EEO Statement

Motorola Solutions is an Equal Opportunity Employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran's status, or, any other protected characteristic.,Data Analyst (Internal Systems)
Location - Houston, TX
Type - Regular, full time
Pay Rate - Commensurate with experience
Travel - Periodic local and overnight travel
About cPanel

With over two decades of growth and experience under our belts, cPanel knows our industry, and we're looking for more people who are spirited, intelligent, friendly, and innovative to help us create more amazing things. We are a tight-knit team that constantly encourages and challenges each other, and above all of that, we sincerely believe in the value of the work that we do.

Because cPanel management cares deeply about helping our employees thrive we offer:
A workplace committed to the cPanel's core values of Integrity, Respect, Collaboration, and Follow-Through
Robust development teams that are practicing Agile Scrum and have everything you need to take a project from start to finish: Product Owners, Scrum Masters, Developers, QA, and Documentation writers all working with the same end goal.
A mid-sized company where your success will have a real impact on the company's success
Free catered onsite lunch every day, snacks, a gym, a flexible work schedule, and all the caffeine you can handle.
A dog-friendly office
Investments in our people by providing professional training, lunch and learns, conferences, and college reimbursement
1st-class work environment utilizing a pod concept: each team has a centralized collaboration area surrounded by a private office for each team member.
Fantastic coworkers who are passionate about creating great software.
An open-door policy to come by and talk about professional topics or just chit chat while you work through an issue.
About the role:

The Data Scientist is innovative, experienced, and highly trained; passionate about moving our company to the next level of being data-driven and advancing our purpose. The Data Scientist will drive internal data analytics projects serving all areas of the company.

The Mission (what you'll be responsible for): The Tools (what knowledge, skills, abilities, and experiences we're looking for)
Utilize reporting/analytics to assist teams in building alternative business models and projections
Identify trends and correlation between business actions and business performance on different customer segments
Understand business context, identify critical business problems, and translate them into actionable information for stakeholders.
Provide customer insights to drive changes across Marketing, Product and various teams and ultimately to improve customer value and key business metrics
Identify business opportunities, conduct financial/ROI assessment and develop projection metrics for sales and opportunities
Work with Marketing research and UX team to understand customer segments and their needs, profile our customer base and monitor the base composition change
Analyze fraud data and make recommendations that decreases fraud/abuse
Create & maintain dashboards with a variety of internal/external data sources
Adhere to the policies and procedures of the company
Exemplify the Core Values of Integrity, Respect, Collaboration and Follow-through
Eligibility Requirements
Advanced knowledge of SQL syntax and usage
Advanced knowledge of relational database design
Strong knowledge of report generation tools such as Jasper, Crystal Reports, or similar
Familiarity with Perl including database-driven web development
Familiarity with web development technologies including JavaScript, Ajax, and jQuery
Familiarity with Linux and underlying components
Education/Experience - Bachelor of Science in Computer Science required or equivalent experience
Four plus years of experience working with SQL and Relational Databases
Two plus years of experience working with report generation tools.
Two plus years experience in relevant business domains, including business intelligence tools, techniques and technology or experience in analytics, business analysis or comparable analytics solutions
At least one year of Perl development experience
In return for all the above, we offer the following:
Competitive Salary
Full Health, Vision, and Dental coverage
Flexible Spending Account
Free on-site lunch
Paid Vacation
Tuition Reimbursement
Casual Working Environment
401K Matching
EEO Statement

At our company, we take great pride in our diverse and talented workforce. We recognize that our continued success as a company depends largely on the collective strengths of our employees.

cPanel provides equal employment opportunities to all employees and applicants without regard to race, color, religious creed, sex, national origin, ancestry, citizenship status, pregnancy, childbirth, physical disability, mental disability, age, military status or status as a Vietnam-era or special disabled veteran, marital status, registered domestic partner or civil union status, gender (including sex stereotyping and gender identity or expression), medical condition (including, but not limited to, cancer-related or HIV/AIDS-related) or sexual orientation in accordance with applicable federal, state and local law. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including, but not limited to hiring, placement, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Privacy is taken seriously at cPanel, Inc. Information submitted is kept internally and not shared with third parties.

If this description fits you, apply below. It's relatively easy and painless.,Shift Type

Job Title

Data Analyst (LiDar, Ortho/Imagery)

Education

Bachelor's Degree

Location

Houston - Houston, TX 77032 US (Primary)

Career Level

Experienced (Non-Manager)

Category

GIS Analytics

Date Needed By

Job Type

Full-time

Travel

Job Description

Position Summary

The Data Analyst is responsible for the analysis of remotely sensed data, including but not limited to LiDAR and aerial photography from all types of sensors which could include aerial, terrestrial and/or static platforms. The Data Analyst is responsible for the Quality Assurance /Quality Control of post-acquisition LiDAR data in preparation for final product generation
Key Accountabilities
LiDAR Analyst:
Feature coding - 2D/3D feature coding and or quality control of collected LiDAR data
Planimetric collection - Using CAD software to create vectors for mapping purposes
PLS–CADD project and .bak file - creation of the final deliverables for clients
Experience using Microstation/PLS-CADD is desirable
Ortho/Imagery Analyst:


Preparation and processing of ortho imagery and associated deliverables
Preparation and processing of oblique imagery and associated deliverables
Quality Control of imagery prepared by others
Understanding of projections and datum transformations
Experience using Microstation/ESRI/Imagery processing software packages
GIS Analyst:


Using internal GIS software prepare/review and process input GIS data to final products
Understanding of projections and datum transformations
Experience in ESRI software key
Other:


Promotes and behaves in a fashion to support GeoDigital’s Cultural Pillars
Complies with company policies and procedures
Performs other tasks as required

# of Hires Needed

1

Exemption Type

Hiring Manager

Job Requirements

Skills, Qualifications, and Competencies
Related work experience
Post-secondary educational in Geography, GIS, Geomatics or other related discipline, or equivalent work experience
High level of computer literacy
Work Environment
Works in a fast paced office environment with multiple priorities and competing demands; potential set-backs in project completion due to internal or external issues, resourcing and re-allocation.
Regular office hours with some requirements for additional work during busy times.
May work for long periods reviewing data on computer.
Assets
Training and/or experience working with PLS CADD
Experience working in Utilities industries
Disclaimer

This job description is not designed to be a complete list of all activities required to be successful in the above position. GeoDigital retains the right to change or assign other activities to this position.

Wage Amount,AOC Solutions is seeking a IT Data Analyst with a TS/SCI with Poly, to join our Federal Solutions team. The location for the position is Reston, VA.

The successful IT Data Analyst will provide support to the Steering Committee and Integrated Product Teams that are comprised of senior level agency officials from the various organizations including CFO, CIO, Human Resources, Logistics, Security, and Facilities.

This support includes:
Assisting the Steering Committee and Working Groups with organizational governance activities
Supporting organizations in the development and issuance of Business Cases, including the coordination of approvals
Accurately maintaining the agency’s IT Portfolio Repository
Providing Program Management oversight for business case development and submissions
Directly contributing to efforts in several key areas, including cost management/avoidance, schedule estimation and tracking, contract performance management, risk management, requirements analysis, and quality assurance activities
Performing tasks that ensure the most efficient and cost-effective execution of contract support activities.
Working with skilled technical resources and report on the technical progress, issues, and problem areas, in addition to writing/reviewing technical documents
Establishing/maintaining/implementing processes, standard operating procedures (SOPs) and work instructions; developing and coordinating policies for Government approval and issuance
Position Requirements:
Bachelors of Science degree from an accredited university with a minimum of 5 years’ experience in the Intelligence Community; preferably in contracts, program management, or finance role.
Proficiency in Microsoft Office Suite (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook), Microsoft SharePoint, Project, and SharePoint.
Experience with Service Request/Trouble Ticketing system applications (i.e. Seibel, Service Now)
In-depth knowledge of Program Management processes and procedures
Knowledge of systems engineering, software development lifecycle, configuration management and contracting processes
Ability to use and evaluate processes/procedures; ability to identify areas for improvement
Broad knowledge of IT infrastructure and Business Systems
EOE M/F/D/V

NOTE: This job description is not intended to be all-inclusive. Employee may perform other related duties as negotiated to meet the ongoing needs of the organization.,Responsibilities
Extract and manipulate large amounts of data using SQL, Excel, and visualization analytics software.
Clean and prepare data from primary and secondary sources, integrate data from multiple disparate data sources into reports for internal & external sources.
Consult with clients (internal and external) to understand business requirements and deliver appropriate data science solutions to meet their needs
Present analytical results and data visualizations in a way that is meaningful for business stakeholders and provides actionable insights
Develop reports that provide insight & access to key performance metrics aligned with the strategic goals of the organization and support key client growth (transform data into usable business intelligence).
Conduct quality control and auditing of various system data to ensure accurate configurations and appropriate use of data.
Perform ad hoc queries and design, prepare and distribute reports.
Work cross-functionally with Operations and Technology teams to improve data quality and reporting needs moving forward.
Perform comfortably in a fast-paced, deadline-oriented work environment
Communicate regularly and effectively with all colleagues
Adhere to all business processes while performing tasks
Exhibit a very organized approached and superior attention to details
Able to take on new tasks and responsibilities as needed
Perform other work-related duties as assigned by management
Qualifications
Bachelor’s degree in computer science, data science, finance, or equivalent work experience
SQL and advanced Excel experience required.
Prior coding experience a plus
Excellent computer skills including all MS Office applications. (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint) required
Proficiency with visual analytics software; Microsoft Power BI and Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services a plus.
Proven analytical, evaluative, and problem-solving abilities
Passionate about sharing your skills and data knowledge with others
Demonstrate a high degree of productivity while handling multiple tasks simultaneously
Excellent written, verbal, communication, and research skills a must
Ability to be flexible to adapt and act quickly when urgent matters require it,Job Description
Duration: 6 months contract

Responsibilities:
• Data Stewards are responsible for assessing and improving the quality of a pharmaceutical client’s customer data (Physicians, Organizations, etc.).
• Using a combination of data and tools, Data Stewards work with client’s data within their systems (MDM, CRM, etc.) and/or spreadsheets to review and verify data.
• Data Stewards follow clear guidelines and instructions for stewarding the client’s data.
• Additional responsibilities include:
• Conduct research by utilizing internal databases and performing web searches to verify the properties of a record are accurate.
• Resolve "unknown" entries by researching through internal references such as phone number reference tool or through external research by calling the physician’s office directly.
• Provide on-going feedback to management of data issues and areas that require special attention.
Skills and Experience Requirements:
• Undergraduate degree (or actively pursuing)
• Experience with IQVIA data and/or medical information (desired)
• Fundamental understanding of relational databases, MDM, Informatica, CRM technologies (desired)
• Detail oriented, good data entry, research, and analytical skills
• Analytics and Reporting experience (desired)
• Strong customer service skills with excellent verbal and written communications
• Eagerness to learn, follow directions, and work independently
• Proficiency in Microsoft Office including Excel, Access, and Word
• SQL experience desired
Additional Information:

• Hours: Client Requirement for Onsite presence for 40 hours per week. Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 am and 5:00 pm US EST.
Qualification Questions
• How many years of Pharmaceutical experience do you have?
• How many years of SQL experience do you have?
• Have you completed the following level of education: Bachelor's?
• Are you in Lexington, MA?,We are hiring Data Analyst Tableau Developer for our client, Role Data Analyst Tableau Developer Duration Long Term Contract Location San Antonio , TX Must Have Skills Tableau Design, E2E Dashborad creation, Data Analytic,Who we're looking forEarth Class Mail is searching for a skilled analyst who has experience across the Business Intelligence (BI) stack, including data pipelining, modeling, visualization, and reporting to key stakeholders. The ideal candidate is ambitious, naturally curious, and has sharp critical thinking skills that are complemented by a broad analytical toolset and strong business acumen. The successful candidate will become a subject matter expert of our data systems, leverage data to inform business decisions, and effectively communicate analysis and findings to all levels of the organization. This is an exciting and unique opportunity to influence senior leadership and impact business outcomes while learning all aspects of the business.Responsibilities* Lead design, development, and implementation of new BI solutions and reports* Lead research projects, business, and market analysis* Use automation and intelligent methodologies to design and improve processes* Serve as subject matter expert for revenue-centric data systems* Co-administer our reporting database using Azure SQL Server* Develop and maintain data pipelines using Azure Data Factory* Document processes, methods, research, and analysis* Communicate and present research and analysis to all levels in the organization* Advise management on key business decisions and processesRequired Experience* Bachelor's Degree in one of the following fields:* Data Analytics, Computer Science, Business, Finance, Science, or Mathematics* 3+ years professional experience as a data or business analyst* Advanced proficiency with SQL in a major relational database system* Advanced proficiency with Microsoft Excel and/or Google Sheets* Proficiency with a data visualization tool(s)* Power BI, Tableau, Looker, etc.* Experience building data pipeline/ETL processes* Understanding of data warehousing, data modeling, and data management principles* Excellent written and verbal communication skills* Strong analytical and problem-solving skillsPreferred Experience* Experience working as a team or project lead* Knowledge of basic Accounting and/or Finance principles* Experience with Financial reporting* Working experience with Python, specifically Pandas* Proficiency with Microsoft SQL Server* Exposure to NoSQL database technologies like MongoDB or ElasticSearch* Exposure to a data integration or ETL platform like Azure Data Factory,Job Description (Posting).* Develop, implement, and maintain leading-edge analytic systems, taking complicated problems and building simple frameworks* Identify trends and opportunities for growth through analysis of complex data sets* Evaluate organizational methods and provide source-to-target mappings and information-model specification documents for data sets* Create best-practice reports based on data mining, analysis, and visualization* Evaluate internal systems for efficiency, problems, and inaccuracies, developing and maintaining protocols for handling, processing, and cleaning data* Work directly with management and users to gather requirements, provide status updates, and build relationships* Work closely with project managers to understand and maintain focus on their analytical needs, including identifying critical metrics and KPIs, and deliver actionable insights to relevant decision-makers* Proactively analyze data to answer key questions from stakeholders or out of self-initiated curiosity with an eye for what drives business performance, investigating and communicating areas for improvement in efficiency and productivity* Create and maintain rich interactive visualizations through data interpretation and analysis integrating various reporting components from multiple data sources* Define and implement data acquisition and integration logic, selecting appropriate combination of methods and tools within defined technology stack to ensure optimal scalability and performance of the solution* Develop and maintain databases by acquiring data from primary and secondary sources, and build scripts that will make our data evaluation process more flexible or scalable across data sets (1.) Suggest design solutions (2.) To participate and facilitate the walkthrough' to brief the Functional Specification mapping to Business Requirements. (3.) To prepare the functional specification document and ensure for completeness and storage. (4.) To prepare and / or aid the preparation of test cases in line with functional requirements (5.) To understand the business requirements and map it to functional specifications.,Requirements
Adept at using Access, Excel, Power Point and Word.
General Data Warehouse / Business Intelligence knowledge including data modeling and Key Performance Indicators (PKIs) preferably in the SAP Business Objects environment.
Develop, implement, and maintain leading-edge analytic systems, taking complicated problems and building simple frameworks
Identify trends and opportunities for growth through analysis of complex data sets
Evaluate organizational methods and provide source-to-target mappings and information-model specification documents for data sets
Create best-practice reports based on data mining, analysis, and visualization
Evaluate internal systems for efficiency, problems, and inaccuracies, developing and maintaining protocols for handling, processing, and cleaning data
Work directly with management and users to gather requirements, provide status updates, and build relationships
Work closely with project managers to understand and maintain focus on their analytical needs, including identifying critical metrics and KPIs, and deliver actionable insights to relevant decision-makers
Proactively analyze data to answer key questions from stakeholders or out of self-initiated curiosity with an eye for what drives business performance, investigating and communicating areas for improvement in efficiency and productivity
Create and maintain rich interactive visualizations through data interpretation and analysis integrating various reporting components from multiple data sources
Define and implement data and integration logic, selecting appropriate combination of methods and tools within defined technology stack to ensure optimal scalability and performance of the solution
Develop and maintain databases by acquiring data from primary and secondary sources, and build scripts that will make our data evaluation process more flexible or scalable across data sets (1.) Suggest design solutions (2.) To participate and facilitate the walkthrough to brief the Functional Specification mapping to Business Requirements. (3.) To prepare the functional specification document and ensure for completeness and storage. (4.) To prepare and / or aid the preparation of test cases in line with functional requirements (5.) To understand the business requirements and map it to functional specifications.
AWS experience highly desired
Requirements
Bachelor's degree in a related field and 2 years experience in Business Intelligence (BI) or Data Warehouses and 2 years experience working with SQL and Access. Four additional years of related experience will be considered in lieu of a Bachelor's degree.
5 years experience in quantitative analysis and statistical modeling (regression, correlation, clustering, etc.).
4 year of experience consulting or experience in a similar field requiring client collaboration, presentation, and delivery.
3 years experience using analytics tools and languages R, Python, SAS, Oracle and SQL etc.
3 years experience combining data sets, extracting key variables, and creating new variables to enhance modeling.
3 years experience performing basic ETL functions and understanding of data quality steps/measures.
US Citizen; no dual citizenship.
Minimum of a Secret Interim clearance to start (Day 1 requirement).
CompTIA Security+ certification required to start (Day 1 requirement).
CDO is an Equal Opportunity Employer,Requirements * Adept at using Access, Excel, Power Point and Word.
General Data Warehouse / Business Intelligence knowledge including data modeling and Key Performance Indicators (PKIs) preferably in the SAP Business Objects environment.
Develop, implement, and maintain leading-edge analytic systems, taking complicated problems and building simple frameworks
Identify trends and opportunities for growth through analysis of complex data sets
Evaluate organizational methods and provide source-to-target mappings and information-model specification documents for data sets
Create best-practice reports based on data mining, analysis, and visualization
Evaluate internal systems for efficiency, problems, and inaccuracies, developing and maintaining protocols for handling, processing, and cleaning data
Work directly with management and users to gather requirements, provide status updates, and build relationships
Work closely with project managers to understand and maintain focus on their analytical needs, including identifying critical metrics and KPIs, and deliver actionable insights to relevant decision-makers
Proactively analyze data to answer key questions from stakeholders or out of self-initiated curiosity with an eye for what drives business performance, investigating and communicating areas for improvement in efficiency and productivity
Create and maintain rich interactive visualizations through data interpretation and analysis integrating various reporting components from multiple data sources
Define and implement data and integration logic, selecting appropriate combination of methods and tools within defined technology stack to ensure optimal scalability and performance of the solution
Develop and maintain databases by acquiring data from primary and secondary sources, and build scripts that will make our data evaluation process more flexible or scalable across data sets (1.) Suggest design solutions (2.) To participate and facilitate the walkthrough' to brief the Functional Specification mapping to Business Requirements. (3.) To prepare the functional specification document and ensure for completeness and storage. (4.) To prepare and / or aid the preparation of test cases in line with functional requirements (5.) To understand the business requirements and map it to functional specifications.
AWS experience highly desired Requirements * Bachelor's degree in a related field and 2 years' experience in Business Intelligence (BI) or Data Warehouses and 2 years' experience working with SQL and Access. Four additional years of related experience will be considered in lieu of a Bachelor's degree. * 5 years experience in quantitative analysis and statistical modeling (regression, correlation, clustering, etc.).
4 year of experience consulting or experience in a similar field requiring client collaboration, presentation, and delivery.
3 years experience using analytics tools and languages R, Python, SAS, Oracle and SQL etc.
3 years experience combining data sets, extracting key variables, and creating new variables to enhance modeling.
3 years experience performing basic ETL functions and understanding of data quality steps/measures.
US Citizen; no dual citizenship.
Minimum of a Secret Interim clearance to start (Day 1 requirement).
CompTIA Security+ certification required to start (Day 1 requirement). CDO is an Equal Opportunity Employer,Job Description
Automotive eCommerce Data Analyst

The Company

Web Shop Manager, located in sunny San Diego, is the world’s leading eCommerce solution for the automotive industry. With 20 years of direct industry experience, we have helped over a thousand businesses worldwide. We are committed to our customers' success and with our 99% customer retention rate we must be doing something right.

The Position

This is a remote position, regardless if there is a global pandemic. #LowRiskCovid19 We do meet up a few times a year, but primarily we use Slack to communicate and Wrike to manage our projects. You'll work directly with our data lead who will provide comprehensive one-on-one training to ensure you're comfortable with our software and processes.

The bulk of this position revolves around enriching product content. This can be anything from categorizing products to stitching together data from various sources. Broad knowledge of the automotive industry is essential to the success of this position.

Requirements
Broad Automotive Knowledge Required
Entry-Intermediate level Excel skills (able to manipulate basic product data)
Excellent listening, verbal and written communication skills
Bonus Points
eCommerce product data experience is a plus
ACES/PIES experience is a major plus
this is a remote position,At Housecall Pro, we're focused on making the everyday lives of home services professionals better by helping them to incorporate mobile software into their workflow...freeing them to focus on what they do best. The home services industry remains vast ($700b+) but untouched by technology and unencumbered by a dominant competitor. The 3M+ mobile businesses in home services are facing dramatic change as the world shifts from offline to online. Along this journey, we are quickly becoming the backbone operating system for service labor across the US and Canada. We have rocketed from MVP to the #1 ranked SaaS software platform in just over 2 years...which has made us the fastest-growing tech startup in San Diego! Our vision is to revolutionize the home services experience. Our mission is to unlock the potential of every Pro.

The role:

Our Analytics team empowers Housecall Pro to be data driven. We are force-multiplier, egoless individuals with an ability to create extraordinary results. We deliver the what and ask for the why; we experiment and bring innovation. We also know the journey is about working with smart people that you can have fun with.

In this role, you are embedded in a team of data analysts, data engineers and data scientists and you'll work closely with cross-departmental teams, aimed at increasing acquisition, retention and revenue. You will guide growth, surface insights, build alerts & forecasts and recommend optimizations based on your descriptive, exploratory, inferential and predictive analysis. You will work along the entire analytics value chain; starting with raw data sources to final data products. You will foster a culture of data-driveness through experimentation and data governance.

Upcoming Analytics projects:
Multi-touch attribution
Cohort reporting & forecasting
Full funnel optimization
KPI Alerts
Cost integration
Build out of self-serve by function
Skills:
3-6 years experience in data analytics at a growth tech company
Analytical, techy, social, curious, confident
Drive and curiosity to answer the why of business performance
Strong background in statistical concepts, modeling, and scenario analysis
Conversant in our tech stack (Snowflake, AWS, Segment, Amplitude, SQL, Tableau, Python)
Demonstrated ability to drive insights and influence decision making
Be a team player
Strong integrity and empathy for what home service professionals do
Eager to own, build, drive, lead, have an impact and lots of fun!
Housecall Pro is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Housecall Pro is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,Come join Intuit as part of the Intuit Customer Success (ICS) team as a Senior Technical Data Analyst for leading key initiatives in the reporting platform team. We are looking for a strong Business Intelligence leader who is a creative problem solver with a passion for innovation, technology and teams to help us revolutionize the way teams run their business and deliver on our mission of powering prosperity around the world.

This is an exciting time to join Customer Success at Intuit as we are building a service platform to help our customers beyond core product use. This is your opportunity to join at the ground level on this exciting and transformational journey in the core data and analytics space.,We are looking for world class analytics talent to help transform our TurboTax Live product offerings. Join the team developing innovative solutions that connect users and tax experts in new ways as we look to transform the way taxes get done.

This role will be primarily responsible for shaping the way we measure and improve product experiences and expert operations by leveraging analytics to help solve customer problems. You will partner closely with product managers, engineering teams, data scientists, and customer success managers to size, develop, and test new features and functionality that deliver awesome experiences for both our customers and tax experts.

Data is central to Intuits decision-making process, and analysts are a critical component to evangelize data-driven decision making as we look to scale TurboTax Live for the future.,Data Analyst - VerityStream

Job Details
Level
Entry
Job Location
San Diego, CA Office - San Diego, CA
Position Type
Full Time
Education Level
4 Year Degree
Salary Range
Undisclosed
Travel Percentage
Undisclosed
Job Shift
Undisclosed
Job Category
Data Services
Position Summary
The VerityStream Data Analyst will coordinate, plan and transfer data from client data sources to company software products using programming, analysis, and technical tools. The Data Analyst assist clients with software installs and upgrades to ensure a smooth transition.

ESSENTIAL DUTIES OR RESPONSIBILITIES:
Using appropriate programming and technical tools, the Data Analyst evaluates client’s data to determine its suitability for transfer into VerityStream’s proprietary software systems.
Works with multiple VerityStream departments as necessary to ensure the successful execution of data transfer and software implementation projects to provide a positive experience for clients.
Perform complex data imports from various database systems into Microsoft SQL Server.
Merge data from one SQL Server database to another SQL Server database.
Perform Enterprise data consolidation.
Job Specifications
JOB SPECIFICATIONS:

KNOWLEDGE/EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE REQUIRED:
Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, or related discipline.
2-4 years of experience with data extraction and transformation tools - Microsoft SQL Server 2008R2/2012/2014 required; Visual FoxPro, and/or Oracle 8i/10g desirable.
SKILLS REQUIRED:
Must be well versed in the following operating systems: Windows 7, 8.1, and 10. Windows Server 2003, 2008, 2012, and 2016.
Intermediate skills with creating .BAT files for execution.
Basic networking skills, including TCP IP, FTP, SFTP, HTTP, HTTPS, Telnet, Netstat, SMPT, SMB, etc.
Intermediate experience with Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2, 2012, 2014, and 2016 and basic administration skills.
Responsible for writing complex T-SQL statements to extract, transform and load data.
Ability to write, analyze, and develop SQL code.
Responsible for developing improved data migration processes using SQL Server Integration Services.
Perform time-sensitive data migrations both during and outside of regular business hours.
Work closely with and communicate effectively with clients, peers, and management teams.
Communicates any issues/concerns regarding contractual obligations related to data transfer services to the Implementation Specialist.
Works with clients during the implementation of all VerityStream software products, including troubleshooting as necessary.
Requires excellent customer service skills and has the ability to communicate effectively in both written and verbal media.
A fundamental understanding of relational database theory and set-based logic.
Excellent time-management, organization, prioritization, and the ability to adapt to rapidly changing technical projects.
ABILITIES REQUIRED:
Able to work cooperatively in a team environment.
Ability to learn and adapt to new technologies rapidly.
Able to demonstrate excellent time-management, prioritization, attention to detail and organization skills.
Extensive computer usage and use of the phone.
Train new team members.
HealthStream is an equal opportunity employer. HealthStream prohibits employment practices that discriminate against individual employees or groups of employees on the basis of age, color, disability, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, pregnancy, veteran or military status, genetic information or any other category deemed protected by state and/or federal law.,Automotive eCommerce Data Analyst

The Company

Web Shop Manager, located in sunny San Diego, is the world's leading eCommerce solution for the automotive industry. With 20 years of direct industry experience, we have helped over a thousand businesses worldwide. We are committed to our customers' success and with our 99% customer retention rate we must be doing something right.

The Position

This is a remote position, regardless if there is a global pandemic. #LowRiskCovid19 We do meet up a few times a year, but primarily we use Slack to communicate and Wrike to manage our projects. You'll work directly with our data lead who will provide comprehensive one-on-one training to ensure you're comfortable with our software and processes.

The bulk of this position revolves around enriching product content. This can be anything from categorizing products to stitching together data from various sources. Broad knowledge of the automotive industry is essential to the success of this position.

Requirements
Broad Automotive Knowledge Required
Entry-Intermediate level Excel skills (able to manipulate basic product data)
Excellent listening, verbal and written communication skills
Bonus Points
eCommerce product data experience is a plus
ACES/PIES experience is a major plus
]]>,Requirements/Job Duties:
World Wide Technology (WWT) is a global technology integrator and supply chain solutions provider. Through our culture of innovation we inspire, build and deliver business results, from idea to outcome. Based in St. Louis, WWT works closely with industry leaders such as Cisco, HPE, Dell EMC, NetApp, VMware and F5, focusing on three market segments: Fortune 500 companies, service providers and the public sector.

Check us out: https://www.youtube.com/user/worldwidetechnology

Take an ATC Tour: https://www.wwt.com/services/atc/

This position supports the US Army Corps of Engineers ACE-IT Program. Conducts or participates in multidisciplinary research and collaborates with equipment designers and/or hardware engineers in the planning, design, development, and utilization of electronic data processing systems software. Utilizing Application Programming Interfaces, including RESTful APIs, the appropriate programming language and COTS software, manages data across disparate systems for purposes of gaining new insights into the that data, and automates the deployment of infrastructure architectures designed by the Systems and Networking Engineers. Locates and integrates data sources for the purpose of process improvement for the customer. Locates and automates time consuming manual tasks. As an alternate to the DevOps Engineer, and under the direction of the DevOps Engineer automate Systems tasks in Ansible. As an alternate to, and under the direction of the ITSM Architect, integrates the ITSM tool set with newly deployed and existing infrastructure and home-grown software, and in coordination with the Operations teams, ensures that all Configuration Items in the Configuration Management Database are in a healthy state. Interfaces with all areas affected by the project including Government and Contractor Engineering team, Operations, and the end user. Defines project scope and objectives and develops detailed work plans, schedules, project estimates, resource plans, and status reports. Conducts project meetings and is responsible for project tracking and analysis. Directs and participates in high-level enterprise architecture analysis, evaluation, design, integration, documentation, and development. Applies high-level business and technical principles and methods to very difficult technical problems to arrive at creative engineering solutions. Recommends and takes action to direct the analysis and solutions of problems. Has a deep understanding of DoD business transformation and processes, DoD organizational structure, and experience in developing briefings and responses to executives both within and external to the department.

Requirements:
Collaborate openly and frankly with all internal and external partners, such as Government Engineers, Contractor Engineers, Contractor Operations staff, Management, and 3rd party vendors
Work independently, help others and ask for help without hesitation
Drive innovation through data analysis, process analysis and automation
Determine innovative methods for using data sources
Collaborate with DevOps and ITSM Engineers on methods for locating and normalizing data sources, and implementing new processes or automations based on the analyzed data
Utilizing a multitude of COTS applications, and programming languages (e.g., Python, JavaScript), automate the collection of data, existing processes, and the deployment of new architectures (Infrastructure as Code). Primary tools and data sources include, but are not limited to:
Tools, Automation, and Orchestration software: UiPath, Hitachi Analytics, SCCM, Puppet, Ansible, GIT, CI/CD, Python, Perl, PowerShell, T-SQL, REST
Virtualization: vSphere, ESXi, vRealize Automation
Microsoft: Windows Server, SQL Server, Cluster Server
Oracle: Solaris, Database Server, WebLogic, Oracle HTTP Server, APEX, GoldenGate
Linux: Red Hat Enterprise Linux, OpenLDAP
Networking: Cisco Prime Infrastructure
Storage: OnCommand Insight, OnCommand Unified Manager, Hitachi Command Suite, NTPSoftware
Cloud architecture, e.g. Azure, Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud Platform
ITSM Tool Set and CMDB: ServiceNow
Other application stack software: Tomcat, WebSphere, ColdFusion, IIS, Identity Access and Management (IDaM), Sailpoint, CyberArk
Provide technical guidance and leadership on the integration of software within the Corps of Engineers' environment
Develop or analyze requirements in a Requirements Traceability Matrix, design and develop solution options in a Systems Engineering Plan, provide test plans, develop implementation plans including integration with existing systems in the production environment, provide engineering support through transition to operations and "Early Life" of new or upgraded systems/services in production, provide tools, processes and procedures for monitoring/performance measurement, event detection, problem identification and remediation, and troubleshooting assistance as needed after deployment
In collaboration with the Government Engineer, bring proposed changes to the Change Advisory Board
Give Continuous Service Improvement recommendations to the Chief Engineer
Report on forthcoming End of Life or End of Support to the Government Engineering team and Contractor Operations support -- develop plans for replacement, to be included in the Technology Refresh Plan
Perform detailed market research, develop Bills of Materials for Government consumption
Develop or update, and continually maintain all as-built site infrastructure drawings and associated documentation
Track work in the provided ITSM tool set and report all project status to the associated Government Engineer, Contractor Project Manager, and Engineering Leadership, etc.
Provide monthly status reports to the Director of Engineering
Document the data and software architecture, including automation and orchestration software, and design choices of the associated applications (Low Level Design, High Level Design)
In collaboration with the ITSM Architect, integrate all systems into the enterprise Configuration Management Database
Assist in daily operational duties regarding Automation/DevOps support, including working a ticket queue, and acting as the highest internal level of Automation/DevOps and Software Engineering, troubleshooting and problem management
In coordination with Government partners, prioritize workload

Qualifications:
Qualifications:
* 5 or more years of relevant experience, or a 4-year degree, or military experience

* Ability to obtain a Secret Clearance required

* Ability to obtain within 6 months of hire, one of the following certifications:

Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP)

--OR- Certified Advanced Security Professional (CASP)

--OR- Security+ (Sec+)

* Certification in an Operating Environment per AR25-2 regulations (e.g., MCP, OCP, CCNA, etc.)

Preferred Qualifications:

Prior USACE/ACE-IT experience.
* Experience working in a DoD environment.,At Harris Govern, we build software solutions specific to the requirements of Local Government. Our software suite enables us to bring comprehensive, innovative technology solutions to our customers across North America.

We are seeking a Data Conversion Analyst to join our team to work closely with a group of talented Business Analysts and Technical Specialists, and report to the Professional Services Data Conversion Manager. In the key role of interpreting business rules and data, our customers will rely on your skills and knowledge to migrate data from various systems into any one of our three product lines.

What your impact will be:
Document customer data requirements and work with the project management team to determine out of scope items.
Develop/test/execute data conversion routines within an established conversion framework in a timely and accurate manner.
Develop and maintain internal and customer-facing conversion documentation.
Convert data from multiple data sources into Microsoft SQL Server.
Create Complex T-SQL scripts with limited assistance
Write and maintain automation scripts using Windows PowerShell.
Verify data integrity and identify data cleanliness issues.
Reconcile converted data to ensure accuracy.
Communicate effectively with management.
Develop good working relationships with departmental staff in order to troubleshoot technical and functional issues that may arise during the implementation process.
What we are looking for:
Intermediate skills in MSSQL with the ability to create and edit complex queries and T-SQL scripts including dynamic SQL.
Solid grasp of SET based coding methodology and relational database structures.
Familiarity with a variety of database types and interfaces (Microsoft Access, Oracle, various text formats, ODBC, OLE DB).
Strong troubleshooting skills and analytical thinking to resolve issues.
Positive, proactive, take charge attitude and attention to detail.
Strong time management skills with the ability to meet deadlines for multiple, concurrent projects.
Ability to quickly gain working knowledge of product, interpret requirements, and recommend solutions.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
Willingness to be coached and mentored and driven to reach your fullest potential.
Ability to travel up to 20% to customer sites as required.
What will make you stand out:
Two or more years of experience in data conversion or a related field.
Bachelor's Degree or higher in Computer Science or Information Technology, equivalent work experience, or certifications and technical training (Microsoft Certification is a plus)
Experience with Windows PowerShell and source control software.
Understanding of general business and accounting principles and practices sufficient to manage accounting related data.
Experience with local government applications, especially related to property tax assessment and collection, is a plus.
What we offer:
A competitive compensation package
A casual work environment
Full range of employee benefits 401(k), Health Insurance (medical, dental, vision, life, short and long-term disability, AD&D)
Paid Vacation
About us:

Since 1975, Harris Govern has provided end-to-end software software for over hundreds of Local Government agencies in the United States and Canada. Our systems help agencies increase revenue and efficiencies through workflow automation, GIS integration, and document management.

Our headquarters in Allen, TX and Montreal, QC and regional office in Fort Collins, CO allows us to provide you with the operational support that you need to keep your agency and teams running smoothly. All of our software solutions come backed with the best team of technical experts who provide ongoing support throughout the lifecycle of your contract.

Applicants must be legally permitted to work in the United States or Canada. This position eligible to work from remote location or office locations in Ft. Collins, CO, Allen, TX, or Montreal, QB.

Harris is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. We consider applicants without regard to race, color, religion, age, national origin, ancestry, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, marital status, veteran status, disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or membership in any other group protected by federal, state or local law.

If you would like to contact us regarding the accessibility of our website or need assistance completing the application process, please contact us at (1)-613-226-5511 or at HarrisTalentAcquisition@harriscomputer.com. This contact information is for accommodation requests only and cannot be used to inquire about the status of applications.,Job Title:
Business Data Analyst

Location:
US, Texas, Plano
Role Overview:


McAfee is looking for an experienced Senior Data Analyst to join our digital team. This is a high visibility role working with sales, finance, and business leaders. . You will report to the head of customer insights and analytics.



Company Overview


From device to cloud, McAfee provides market-leading cybersecurity solutions for both business and consumers. We help businesses orchestrate cyber environments that are truly integrated, where protection, detection, and correction of security threats happen simultaneously. For consumers, McAfee secures your devices against viruses, malware, and other threats, both at home and away. We want to continue to shape the future of cybersecurity by working together to build best in class products and solutions.

About the Role:
You will work with global business leads helping them with our strategy discussions aiding with important insights on customer journey and on key metrics.
You will perform data analysis across all applicable marketing technologies, and communicate recommendations based on findings.
You will summarize data from multiple sources, developing assumptions where needed, to communicate insights and opportunities.
You will build analysis, data visualizations, and reporting that provides important insights required for decision-making in the organization.
You will organize needs, collaborate in the design of diagnostic solutions, develop experimentation backlog based on opportunity ranking and provide data products and insights.
Translate requirements into technical specifications for data and reporting teams and, conversely, technical approaches into easily digestible insights.
You will work with the digital marketers to build time series, seasonality and forecasting models on demand and act in a data science role.
You will develop processes and protocols for data monitoring, hygiene (e.g. validation), and other strategies that help uncover gaps and opportunities to improve the business.
You will conduct cross-training sessions with team about new tools and techniques for mining customer insights.
You will create informative repeatable reporting that highlights relevant business trends and opportunities for improvement.
About You:
You have experience transforming data trends into useful customer insights business can use to guide data-driven strategy and customer experience.
You have 4+ years of experience in a digital role working with data, excels, and business models as part of a marketing team.
You have previously worked in Digital, Traditional, and Business to Consumer marketing teams.
You have a working knowledge of PowerBI, Azure, Adobe Analytics, or Google Analytics.
You have experience using Excel pivot tables and Vlookups
You have experience and an understanding of SQL.
You have worked with Tableau, Power BI or similar visualization tools.
You are familiar or interested in ever-growing Internet technologies and marketing tactics like Search, Social, or SEO
Company Benefits and Perks:


We work hard to embrace diversity and inclusion and encourage everyone at McAfee to bring their authentic selves to work every day. We offer a variety of social programs, flexible work hours and family-friendly benefits to all of our employees.
Pension and Retirement Plans
Medical, Dental and Vision Coverage
Paid Time Off
Paid Parental Leave
Support for Community Involvement
We're serious about our commitment to diversity which is why McAfee prohibits discrimination based on race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, marital status, pregnancy, gender expression or identity, sexual orientation or any other legally protected status.

Job Type:


Experienced Hire

Primary Location:
US, Texas, Plano

Additional Locations:
US, California, Santa Clara,BE Innovative. BE RealPage.RealPage Outperforms! We are a leading global provider of software and data analytics to the real estate industry. Clients use our platform to improve operating performance and increase capital returns.We are a run fast, have fun and reap rewards type of environment. RealPage offers an engaging work culture that fosters personal and career growth for our employees. We continually reinvent and evolve to meet the needs of the customers we serve through technology and vision. You can feel it in the work we do and the clients that benefit. Our unique company philosophy fosters innovation, excellence and collaboration.OverviewThe Revenue Operations Renewal Analyst is part of the Renewal Operations team within the larger Revenue Operations team that partners with Sales, Legal, and Finance to provide data, reporting, and analysis for Realpage's renewal process. The Renewal Analyst is responsible for maintaining accurate data for client renewals across multiple platforms and understanding/coordinating renewal activity both internally and externally.Responsibilities* Serve as an authoritative knowledge source for Realpage's renewal operations.* Preparation and management of client renewals in close partnership with the Sales Operations department.* Renewal reporting, including ad hoc reports as needed or requested.* Partner with Sales, Sales Operations, Client Management, Contracts, and Deal Desk on all renewal related operational issues.* Cultivate internal and external relationships to gain new knowledge and competencies. Provide technical advice to resolve moderately complex renewal issues and discrepancies.* Provide information and/or clarification on client contract and renewal information to internal resources as requested.* Support the renewal book of business by providing client renewal data and related reporting for forecasting and client analysis utilizing Excel and Salesforce.com.* Ensure that clients receive yearly renewal notifications within the period defined in client contractsQualifications* Minimum of 1-2 years of experience in a renewal operations, revenue operations, sales operations, or finance supporting operational role.* Revenue Cycle or Billing experience or Bachelor's degree in related field.* Bachelor's degree preferred with background in Business, Accounting or Finance preferred, but not required.* Intermediate experience using Excel.* Excellent verbal and written communication skills to effectively partner with colleagues across all departments and levels.* Strong analytical, research, and problem solving skills.* Ability to manage, analyze, and track data for a sophisticated and often complex sales process.* Ability to work independently, multi-task, achieve tight deadlines, and take initiative on multiple projects.,The data integration analyst will be responsible for planning and coordinating the integration of client data into the Apptricity mobile and web-based applications. Tasks will include but are not limited to: collecting, analyzing, transforming and loading data from multiple information lanes into one or more databases; verifying and maintaining the integrity of the data, the databases, and associated database functions; coordinating the extraction of data to support specific project needs. The successful candidate must be able to work with developers and data scientists to recommend system updates as well as new solutions, and must be able to communicate effectively with client teams to ensure the completeness and accuracy of the data stored in and retrieved from client databases. Must be able to play a critical role on the team by acting as a SME (subject-matter-expert) and Go-To person to support business clients, internal team members, and application development teams.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities
Collects, analyzes, transforms, and loads scientific data into a database using SQL, Excel, and other programs and/or ETL tools
Prepares reports by analyzing and interpreting data
Works continuously with developers and clients to ensures the integrity of all incoming data and stored data
Interacts directly with clients and team members to determine data-related requirements and develops and implements effective data management strategies to meet these needs
Regularly monitors and evaluates information and data systems that could affect analytical results
Works with clients and Apptricity team members to gather requirements and suggest solutions for new database or database tool development efforts or upgrades to existing systems, and works with developers and data analysts to implement solutions
Required Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities
Experience in data management and analysis
Ability to decipher and organize large amounts of data from disparate sources
Experience in methodologies and processes for managing Relational Database Management Systems (SQL Server, Oracle, or Access)
Ability to analyze existing tools and database systems and provide software solution recommendations
Ability to develop and communicate solutions to complex problems clearly and in nontechnical terms
Ability to manage multiple deadlines
Experience with data analysis tools (e.g., R, Python) preferred
Scientific background in chemistry, biology or related field preferred,Performance Engineering Services – Data Analyst
Duration: 12 Months

Your principal responsibility is to participate within the Performance Assurance Monitoring assisting other team members with SQL queries automation necessary to extract, transform, or load data as part of integration and analysis development. You will be responsible to cooperate with Operations/ IT team to deploy software and hardware upgrades that make it possible for us to leverage big data use cases. You will be responsible for utilizing a variety of reporting tools and software (Tableau and Business Objects), develops queries to generate reports and/or gather data from multiple sources. Focuses on client needs in defining data requirements and retrieving accurate information reporting requirements from start to finish to minimize future revisions. Also, you will be responsible for the identification, analysis, and diagnostics of wireless telecommunications networks performance characteristics. You will be responsible for monitoring KPIs, spotting trends, and correlating metrics across a diverse network infrastructure. You will answer technical questions as well as day to day operational questions. You will work independently with limited guidance to accomplish goals and objectives.

Specific Responsibilities include:
• Comprehensive knowledge of database administration (design, installation & troubleshooting)
• Experience performing indexes and stored procedure tuning; handling security, backups and recovery.
• Extensive familiarity with SQL queries.
• Analyze and address database resource contention issues including inefficient queries.
• Analyze, design, build and support current and new data feeds from various data sources to the data warehouse.
• Writes and modifies SQL queries, Views and stored procedures for Automation producing reports that track KPIs performance metrics and systematizes automated reporting processes.
• Build dashboards (using Tableau, Python and other BI tools) that illustrate how key performance indicators (KPIs) and metrics are changing over time.
• Develop presentations to communicate findings to internal and external customers.
• Exercise judgment within generally defined practices and policies in selecting methods and techniques for obtaining solutions and results.
• Present ideas, technical and non-technical, in a logical, compelling manner in a written format and verbally in both small and large group settings
• Work with the Network Engineering and Operations Teams on the cell site’s antenna and RF equipment configuration and database parameters

Background & Competencies Required:
• Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science or Electrical Engineering; Master’s Degree a plus; 5-10 years’ work experience in the wireless industry
• 3+ years of experience developing SQL/Oracle server objects e.g., store procedures, tables, triggers, views and functions.
• 3+ years of experience developing Oracle server objects e.g., store procedures, tables, triggers, views and functions.
• 3+ years of experience with at least one of the common industry data visualization tools (Tableau, Spotfire, Business Objects, Power BI, etc.) for data correlation, analysis, reporting, etc.
• 3+ years of experience of wireless network KPI monitoring, trouble shooting and optimization, prefer with wireless infrastructure providers and /or operators.
• Strong knowledge on 3G/4G/5G KPI definitions and formulas; good understanding of 3GPP protocols.
• 3+ years hands on working experience with one of more wireless EMS system; building analysis reports using CM/PM/FM data
• Advanced working knowledge of Base Station Vendor equipment (Samsung, Alcatel Lucent, Ericsson)
• Demonstrated problem solving skills via prior work experience.
• A solid understanding of RF fundamentals and data network protocols
• Must have a strong work ethic, integrity and work extremely well in a team environment
• Must have an aptitude for creativity and innovation
• Programming knowledge and experience a plus: SQL, Python, R
• Database design and administration a plus
• 3+ years working experience with one of more EMS system; Advanced working knowledge of Base Station Vendor equipment (Samsung, Alcatel Lucent, Ericsson)
• Advanced working experience on Microsoft Excel, PowerPivot, PowerPoint
• Strong interpersonal communication skills
• Proven ability to manage multiple priorities in a fast paced environment
• Tableau Desktop Certified Professional Certification (preferred)
• Python (preferred)
• Database Administration Certification(preferred)
• Bilingual in Korean (preferred)

Physical/Mental Demands and Working Conditions: The position requires the ability to perform the essential duties and responsibilities in the following environment:
• Excellent interpersonal and communication skills. Must be skilled in developing and maintaining good working relationships with all appropriate levels within and outside the company
• Operate a computer keyboard and view a video display terminal more than 75% of work time in an office work environment
• Frequently works additional hours beyond normal schedule
• Performs work under time schedules and stresses which are normally periodic or cyclical and include time sensitive job stress, fatigue, unpaid over-time, intellectual challenge, constant technical data feedback, language barriers, and project management stress.
• Machines, tools, equipment, and work aids include PC’s, printers, etc. most often associated with office work area equipment
• Travel to customer locations, etc. approximately 20% of time
• Under minimal supervision with a high level of responsibility to apply general policies and guidelines where decisions are seldom monitored, consequences of decisions may adversely affect operating results and management decisions. Position has complete access to confidential company data where disclosure may jeopardize the company’s competitive position

Thank you,
Sachin Patil,
510-402-1063
sachin@apninc.com,Role:Senior Data Analyst
Required Skills: Understanding of Sensitive data management ,Python
programming, domain knowledge on SDM and PII data.
Location: Plano, TX

Responsibilities :
Understand business environment and sensitive data management
approaches.
Rule development, testing and deployment
Upgradation and Policy Implementation Should be able to customize
rules and policies to implement out of the box solutions.
Propose solutions to critical issues through specific inquiries and
consultation.
Server Monitoring - Should be able to Analyze, Debug and Troubleshoot
Server issues
User Access Management He should be familiar with access management
tools and how to enable/disable user accesses considering all the
compliance policies and rules in the Org.
Update and maintain project artifacts and documents. Assist in developing
knowledge assets such as methodologies, templates, etc.
Should be having good knowledge of Agile and Scrum
Required Skills:
Excellent Domain knowledge of maintaining PII data and Encryption
Domain Knowledge of Tokenization/Detokenization implementation
Protegrity
Python 3
Java
REST API
Linux
Putty
Agile and SCRUM
Desired Skills:
Understanding of Databases like SQL Server, Oracle, Netezza
Reporting Tools like Tableau
Server Administration
HCL Technologies is a next-generation global technology company that helps
enterprises reimagine their businesses for the digital age. Our technology
products, services and engineering are built on four decades of innovation,
with a world-renowned management philosophy, a strong culture of invention and
risk-taking, and a relentless focus on customer relationships. With a worldwide
network of R&D, innovation labs and delivery centers, and 149,000+
Ideapreneurs working in 45 countries, HCL serves leading enterprises
across key industries, including 250 of the Fortune 500 and 650 of the Global
HCL generated consolidated revenues of USD 9.7 billion for 12 Months
Ended 31st Dec, 2019

HCL has been a part of the United States growth and technological
advancement since 1989, when we commenced operations with our first office in
the heart of Silicon Valley. We ve witnessed a remarkable journey in the
three decades that followed, where we ve stayed true to our vision of growi
together: expanding across 21 states to drive complex engineering programs,
creating career opportunities for the nation s brightest, as well as
partnering with several top F500 companies, helping them build their businesses
and better serve their customers, through the innovations, breakthroughs and
new opportunities that have shaped the technology industry today.

We offer an integrated portfolio of products, solutions, services, and IP
through our Mode_1-2-3_strategy built around Digital, IoT, Cloud, Automation,
Cybersecurity, Analytics, Infrastructure Management and Engineering Services,
amongst others, to help enterprises reimagine their businesses for the digital
age. For more information, please visit .
EOE Disability/Veteran
Show moreShow less,REQUIREMENTS:
4+ years of extensive experience in IDQ feature set – data profiling/analyst, match/merge, exception data handling, meta data management.
6+ years of extensive experience with Informatica Power Center either with Oracle and/or Teradata.
Experience working with one or more of Address cleansing/standardization/matching, CASS certification, Geospatial data and Tax Geocode, FIPS and Census information.
SUMMARY:
The ideal candidate will have deep understanding of data warehouse concepts with modeling techniques.
Responsible for working with Data Warehouse team members to design, code, test and support DW applications/load processes within an Oracle, Teradata and Informatica environment.
Hands on Oracle, Teradata and Informatica suite of products development/support experience required. Experience in big data technologies is a plus. Self-driven, outside the box thinking and ability build POCs is a must.
EDUCATION/EXPERIENCE;
Bachelors or Masters in Information Systems or equivalent.
Minimum 8 – 10 years in information technology 8+ years in a data warehouse environment.
MAJOR DUTIES:
Familiarity with software development methodologies and lifecycle processes. Design and maintain ETL procedures in a variety of environments, including UNIX, Windows, Oracle, Teradata and Informatica.
Define, document and execute test cases to effectively validate the new components of the data warehouse being developed, enhanced or otherwise maintained.
Define and follow standards for data warehouse. Engage in peer reviews of design and code.
Complete mandatory application documentation, as specified by project.
Provide support for applications developed and be able to resolve problems encountered.
This support is both during normal work hours and off hours, as required, to bring application back into Service Level Agreement times. Follow company problem and change management processes.
Mentor to other personnel - provide knowledge transfer as necessary. Work with Oracle, Teradata, Informatica product suite and Tibco spotfire reporting environments.
If you have the above qualification and are available to look into this opportunity please send your updated resume along with your contact# and I will call you back to discuss further.
Cordially,
Mohammed Abdul
APN Software Services, Inc .
39899 Balentine Drive, Suite 385, Newark, CA 94560 .
Direct: 510.623.5049 | Fax: 510.623.5055 | Email: abdul@apninc.com,Do you look for patterns, love investigating the root cause, and thrive in a fast-paced environment?

We are now looking for a Senior HR Data Analyst. In this role, you will partner with leaders in HR to influence business decisions by turning data into meaningful insights. As an HR Analytics team, we build, standardize, and automate reports. We create visualizations with easy to interpret analytics and uncover the key drivers in the data. We promote data integrity, and educate end users to drive self-service adoption.

What you’ll be doing:
Translate data and trends into stories to drive business decisions
Create visualizations from which leaders can easily draw insights and recommendations
Build and automate easy to use, self-service reports and dashboards
Provide direction and coaching to end users on how to use and interpret metrics
Deliver standard reports/dashboards on a regular cadence
Audit data integrity, investigate concerns, and establish processes to streamline and improve data quality
Partner cross functionally with IT to help design and build out HR analytics data warehouse
What we need to see:
Bachelor's degree in a field where you have analyzed and displayed data (i.e. computer science, math, engineering, economics, statistics, psychology) or equivalent work experience
8 years of experience performing quantitative/statistical analysis and displaying the results as meaningful insights
Experience creating custom reports/dashboards in Workday HCM/Recruiting and building visualizations in Tableau
Advanced knowledge of Microsoft Excel
Strong initiative, curiosity, and comfort with uncertainty
Excellent presentation and communication skills, including the ability to explain technical subject matter to a non-technical audience
Ability to work in a fast-paced, rapidly evolving environment and agility to alternate between strategic projects and tactical reporting/analysis requests
Ways to stand out from the crowd:
Expertise in analyzing large data sets with R or Python
Experience with machine learning or text mining
With competitive salaries and a generous benefits package, we are widely considered to be one of the technology world’s most desirable employers.

NVIDIA is committed to fostering a diverse work environment and proud to be an equal opportunity employer. As we highly value diversity in our current and future employees, we do not discriminate (including in our hiring and promotion practices) on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, gender expression , sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, disability status or any other characteristic protected by law.,Who We Are


Nuro is a robotics start-up whose mission is to accelerate the benefits of robotics for everyday life. We have an elite team of entrepreneurs and engineers, designers, and scientists. We believe AI and robotics are at the cusp of transforming daily life and we are dedicated to building meaningful products with this technology. Join us and play a critical role in our mission.

About the Role


In this role, you will play a major role in analyzing & visualizing large amounts of operational data and building a platform that enables monitoring and progress. Operational data and metrics are large and a growing key to our business success and an effective metrics pipeline is critical to provide the team with up-to-date insights. This position demands broad expertise in data analysis and visualization, social skills to work with internal customers, and determined execution.

About the Work
Build and maintain dashboards, reports, and visualization tools
Work with operations leaders, program managers, and other analysts to design effective ways of summarizing and identifying trends from large amounts of data
Collaborate closely with the infrastructure team to effectively organize our data and build data extraction and analysis pipelines
About You
Large appetite for and experience building dashboards and visualization tools
Passion for large-scale data analysis
Strong coding skills in Python and SQL
Excellent communication, presentation, interpersonal, and analytical skills; the ability to work with non-technical customers to solve problems
Demonstrated an ability to thrive in the ambiguity of a dynamic, start-up environment to iterate fast
Bonus Points
Experience with operations, robotics, and/or autonomy
Experience with Google Data Studio, BigQuery, and other Google tools
Experience in geographical data visualization
JavaScript and Web design
Experience implementing machine learning and data science workloads
Data visualization experience using R, Python, d3.js or Tableau
Nuro is an equal opportunity employer and expressly prohibits any form of workplace harassment based on race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, genetic information, disability, or veteran status.,Posted: Apr 14, 2020
Role Number:
200165385
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, new ideas have a way of becoming phenomenal products, services, and customer experiences very quickly.

Bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

In the growing Apple Media Products Analytics Engineering team you will perform data analysis and dig into rich user experience big data, finding out the root cause of data issues.

You will collaborate with leading data scientists, crafting out data curations and annotations for building data science and machine learning solutions.

Your insights will contribute to the team’s data products and platforms quality improvement for Apple’s growing service sector such as Apple Music, Apple TV and Apple Arcade
Key Qualifications
We expect strong working experiences and knowledge about data analytics with proficient SQL language skill
Understanding the business implication of metrics based on web/app user experience event data such as clickstream, play, commerce transactions.
Strong sense of initiative and ability to drive projects run by multi-functional team to completion
Excellent communication skills
Experience with Hadoop, Spark, Hive or other big data processing technologies desired
We would love to see programming skills in Python, R, Scala or similar languages
Description
We are looking for an individual with a passion for solving complex data problems with attention to detail and logical thinking skills.

You will partner with data engineers and project managers to conduct deep data investigation analysis to contribute data quality innovative improvements for Apple’s growing service products. Based on investigation results and work with data scientists, you will design data pipeline important metric's so that team can monitor and detect anomalies earlier. This is a phenomenal opportunity to work on real big data with the latest technologies and contribute Apple’s data quality and privacy initiatives.

We ideally want someone who can quickly understand the architecture of engineering projects and can explore produced datasets with HDFS command line tool and data querying languages such as Spark SQL.

Based on the understanding of data and engineering architecture, can identify potential areas of risks that could collapse the pipeline or harm a quality of data output.

Has a strong skill of engineering project management. Can facilitate of technical and business discussion to determine what is the right technical resolution to tackle business problems.

Can quickly learn new data analytics tools to keep up with the rapid evolution of big data solutions - from traditional RDB languages (ex. Oracle SQL, MySQL) to the latest big data analytics languages (ex. Spark RDD & Dataframe, Python Pandas/Numpy, R), also being flexible in learning various UI based tools (Splunk, Tableau) as it’s needed.
Education & Experience
Bachelor or Master's degree in related field, such as Data Science, Computer Science, Statistics, Business Administration, Business Analytics, or meaningful industry experience preferred,Posted: Feb 24, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200152107
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, great ideas have a way of becoming great products, services, and customer experiences very quickly. Bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

The Worldwide Channel Strategy & Operations Team provides support to Apple’s key partners in the areas of Fixture Installation, Preservation, POS support systems and Merchandising.

We’re looking for a Financial Data Analyst based in Cupertino. In this role you will be responsible for producing and maintaining highly detailed and meaningful reporting, analysis and forecasting on behalf of the CSO team in order to provide guidance and performance metrics for our programs.

The ideal candidate is a self-starter with strong analytical and technical skills to solve complex problems in various situations. You are able to work independently and as part of a larger, cross-functional team. You have good communication skills and be able to effectively interact and influence all levels within the organization.
Key Qualifications
Self-starter with innovation, integrity and strong attention to details
Expertise in Tableau, GBI, SAP, SQL, VBA, R and Python, as well as Excel, Keynote and FileMaker
Experience working with global teams
Excellent communication, planning and analytical skills, as well as high technical/systems proficiency
Experience with Financial Purchase to Pay activities (raising PR’s, processing goods receipts, etc)
Experience with capacity planning at a large scale
Proficiency in Mac OS
3-5 years professional experience
Bi-lingual / Multi-lingual a plus
Description
Create and maintain Tableau dashboards for the CSO team, providing performance and forecast data in a meaningful actionable way for end-users

Execute capacity plans for the Channel Contact Center team, advising on complex conditions such as language, volume and headcount

Assist on cross-functional, system-heavy initiatives, such as an a data consolidation

Database management and ad-hoc reporting as needed by various business units

Support design of data induction Apple vendors into Apple GBI

Collect reporting requirements from world wide and regional Apple sales teams

Work on reporting automation and identify key areas to call out in order to increase team efficiency

Assist as necessary in the completion of financial processing duties such as quarter close-out, including accruals and re-classes
Education & Experience
B/A in Finance, Mathematics or related work experience,Posted: May 18, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200161665
The Product Marketing Customer Analytics team is seeking a Sr. Data Scientist with deep technical and consultative experience in business analytics and analytic engineering.
Key Qualifications
Excellent understanding of analytical methods and machine learning algorithms including regression, clustering, classification, optimization, regularization, dimensionality reduction and other advanced analytic techniques.
5+ years of industry experience building data science driven solutions to solve business problems.
3+ years of hands-on coding skills (Python, R, and Spark preferred) processing large-scale data, deriving key insights, developing machine learning models on structured and unstructured data, and maintaining production machine learning pipelines that are part of a production-type analytic solution.
Solid technical database and data modeling knowledge (Oracle, Hadoop, Teradata), and experience optimizing SQL queries on large dataset.
2+ years of experience working with Tableau or other data visualization technologies.
Outstanding written, verbal, and presentation skills with the ability to develop and present conclusions and recommendation to senior executives.
Able to work effectively on sometimes ambiguous data and constructs within an fast changing environment, tight deadlines and priority changes.
Team player who enjoys collaborating with others.
Description
Support Product Marketing, Investor Relations, and the Executive Team with analytics for customer product and services engagement.

Conduct regular and ad-hoc analyses, data mining and predictive analytics to provide leadership with actionable insights at tactical and strategic levels related to the active customer and device install base.

Consult and support Product Marketing business analysts with insights and recommendations for iPhone, iPad, Mac, iPod, Apple TV, Apple Watch, and the intersection of customer product and services engagement.

Work cross-functionally with iTunes, iCloud, Sales, Retail, Apple Online Store, AppleCare and Services teams on collaborative customer analytic projects.

Conceive and design end-to-end optimized data modeling pipelines and customer analytic scripted solutions using Python and/or Spark.

Manage data science projects through all phases, including data quality, data modeling, algorithm/feature development, statistical analysis, and data visualization.
Education & Experience
Graduate degree required in Business (with quantitative emphasis), Statistics, Data Mining, Machine Learning, Analytics, Econometrics, Mathematics, Operations Research, Industrial Engineering, or related field.,Requisition ID: 258554
Work Area: Software-Development Operations
Expected Travel: 0 - 10%
Career Status: Professional
Employment Type: Regular Full Time

COMPANY DESCRIPTION

SAP started in 1972 as a team of five colleagues with a desire to do something new. Together, they changed enterprise software and reinvented how business was done. Today, as a market leader in enterprise application software, we remain true to our roots. That’s why we engineer solutions to fuel innovation, foster equality and spread opportunity for our employees and customers across borders and cultures.
SAP values the entrepreneurial spirit, fostering creativity and building lasting relationships with our employees. We know that a diverse and inclusive workforce keeps us competitive and provides opportunities for all. We believe that together we can transform industries, grow economics, lift up societies and sustain our environment. Because it’s the best-run businesses that make the world run better and improve people’s lives.

Key Responsibilities & Tasks

> Works in a cross-functional implementation team and is responsible for development focusing on design, coding, testing and quality assurance of specific product features.
> Ability to analyze and solve issues in existing and new code.
> Demonstrates full responsibility for accepted tasks and therefore demonstrates a high level of quality, speed, reliability and efficiency.
> Works closely together with other team members to ensure the team success. Enhances skills beyond own core functional focus and works on other tasks for the benefit of the team.
> Has proficient overall product knowledge incl. relevant business processes & scenarios and a basic understanding of customer needs.
> Has basic knowledge and technical competencies of relevant programming languages and related development tools and processes.
> Works independently and designs solutions to enhance test automation and processes within own domain expertise.
> Analyzes, defines, implements and executes quality and test related activities according to a given test strategy for the product area.
> Creates a detailed test design incl. test system landscape requirements and product standards, prepares tests (customizing & master data), authors and executes manual and/or automated tests.
> Analyzes test results and takes appropriate follow-up actions.
> Coaches the team in terms of development, quality assurance and test related processes, methods and tools.
> Collaborates with user experience experts and implement proposed designs of specific product features.
> Attends customer interaction activities (conference calls, on-site sessions, escalations) for specific product features and shares learning back with the implementation team.
> Shares knowledge and helps grow the capabilities of the team through presentations, mentoring, and coaching in your implementation team.

Accountability

>responsible for delivery of outcome of assigned sub projects
>works independently within given area of responsibility (within defined policies and processes)
>contributes to milestones

Complexity

>contributes and works on sub projects and activities with moderate level of complexity
>work is independent & collaborative in nature.
>provides regular updates to manager or project manager on project status
>Decisions/solutions can essentially enhance existing systems & processes

Experience

>strong competence with various tools, procedures, programming languages used to accomplish the job

Communication

>builds collaborative work relationships with similar functions across SAP
>communicates clearly, in a way that others can understand within defined processes & policies
>communicates relevant messages in a timely manner and with constructive feedback to colleagues & managers

WHAT YOU GET FROM US
Success is what you make it. At SAP, we help you make it your own.
A career at SAP can open many doors for you. If you’re searching for a company that’s dedicated to your ideas and individual growth, recognizes you for your unique contributions, fills you with a strong sense of purpose, and provides a fun, flexible and inclusive work environment – apply now.

SAP'S DIVERSITY COMMITMENT
To harness the power of innovation, SAP invests in the development of its diverse employees. We aspire to leverage the qualities and appreciate the unique competencies that each person brings to the company.

SAP is committed to the principles of Equal Employment Opportunity and to providing reasonable accommodations to applicants with physical and/or mental disabilities. If you are interested in applying for employment with SAP and are in need of accommodation or special assistance to navigate our website or to complete your application, please send an e-mail with your request to Recruiting Operations Team. (Americas:Careers.NorthAmerica@sap.com or Careers.LatinAmerica@sap.com, APJ: Careers.APJ@sap.com, EMEA: Careers@sap.com). Requests for reasonable accommodation will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Successful candidates might be required to undergo a background verification with an external vendor.

EOE AA M/F/Vet/Disability:
Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to their age, race, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, protected veteran status or disability.

Successful candidates might be required to undergo a background verification with an external vendor.
Additional Locations:,At Cadence, we hire and develop leaders and innovators who want to make an impact on the world of technology.

Cadence has an exciting opportunity for an Advace Data Analyast with their Hardware Systems Verification Materials Team. This person will analyze quality and reliability data and information and perform advanced statistical analysis. Other responsibilities include, but are not limited to the following::
Responsible for Quality System Maintenance.
Root cause analysis and implementation of corrective action for process related concerns.
Assist Quality manager in establishing, implementing and maintaining the quality management system.
Responsible for continual improvement activities to enhance the quality system, such as 5S, Kaizen lean methods, etc.
Develop training to build data analysis and corrective action processes
Interface with Engineering and Operations to ensure transfer to Production of new products are in accordance with approved data.
Conduct audits, including closing out audit findings, creating audits finding reports and determine proper corrective and preventive actions.
Analyze failure, corrective and preventive action to respond to customer complaints.
Create and maintain related procedures to data analysis and corrective action
Responsible for planning, organizing and managing the overall activities of receiving / outgoing quality functions.
Continuously improving QA receiving inspection process and procedures.
Ensure timely resolution of supplier failure, corrective actions and preventive actions.
Manage suppliers performance and conduct audits.
Perform measurement of the customer satisfaction index
Work with supply chain and materials management to manage supplier quality issues
Develop the suppliers scorecard and present to the suppliers
Provide customers report and analysis
Work with internal manufacturing and suppliers to improve product quality and reliability
Prepare and manage the management review meetings
Prepare the quality instructions, procedures and customers requested reports
Requirements & Qualifications
BS or Master degree in science or 10 years related experience
A hands-on understanding of manufacturing and operations processes and procedures especially for Telecommunications industry.
Demonstrating the ability to organize, prioritize, manage staff, solve problems,
Achieve an understanding of the current process and procedures used in the electro-mechanical assembly area for standard product assembly
Develop reliability measurements (MTBF, DOA, IRR, YRR)
Determines quality improvement parameters by identifying statistical methods relevant to manufacturing processes.
Establishes statistical confidence by identifying sample size and acceptable error; determining levels of confidence
Were doing work that matters. Help us solve what others cant.,Posted: Jun 29, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200159997
We are seeking a Data Analyst with an aim to turn the huge amounts of data generated by these applications into business insights that improve customer experience. You will have a bent for applied research with expertise in pattern mining, anomaly detection, predictive modeling, classification and optimization. You will take pride in implementing and sustaining end-to-end analytical solutions that have direct and measurable impact. The role requires both a broad knowledge of existing analytics algorithms and creativity to invent and customize when necessary.

Deep expertise in data processing, analysis and evaluation including hands-on experience with big data sets is required to analyze and mine our extensive database for worldwide points-of-interest, rich content and related information.
Key Qualifications
Experience with with at least one scripting or programming language (Python, R, JavaScript, or Scala)
Hadoop experience (MapReduce, Hive, Spark) is a huge plus
Experience with Postgres, including PostGIS is a plus
Strong data analysis skills and business presentation skills /story-telling
Capable of working with large sets using internal and industry standard tools.
Delivery-oriented, able to lead and execute analysis efforts from start to finish
Ideal candidate should be self-motivated with a can-do attitude
Great teammate, strong interpersonal skills, go-getter
Description
- Perform analysis & UAT of map data validation tools
Identify validation gaps and advocate with stakeholders & engineering groups to fill those gaps
Perform root cause analysis of production system anomalies
Communicate complex data concepts and the results of the analyses in a clear and effective
manner to management
Work with large volumes of data; be able to extract and manipulate large datasets
Build visual reports and dashboards
Develop prototype or proof of concept analysis tools
Education & Experience
BS in computer science or equivalent.

Apple is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to inclusion and diversity. We take affirmative action to ensure equal opportunity for all applicants without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, Veteran status, or other legally protected characteristics. Apple is committed to working with and providing reasonable accommodation to applicants with physical and mental disabilities. Apple is a drug-free workplace,Posted: May 4, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200168490
Do you love solving sophisticated challenges and are passionate about data? Are you an inventive, self-starter who takes pride in seeing ideas come to life on a global scale? If so, come check out our Apple Cloud Services team! We get to influence data led decisions that touch billions of Apple’s customers every day!

This is a hands-on full stack data analyst role that provides data driven insight to improve revenue, margin and the customer experience of iCloud services. You will build data engineering assets and statistical models to surface meaningful business insights and communicate results and ideas to key decision makers.

You will work closely with multi-functional teams such as marketing, finance, product engineering teams, understand their processes and analytic needs and provide insights that benefit Apple.

This is a small and outstanding technology team passionate about addressing all the big-data processing needs for iCloud. We are developing a platform that can accomplish any task with an intuitive, simple to use user interface, and easy deployment to production. Come check us out!
Key Qualifications
- 5+ years of experience in analyzing data and reporting
- Strong data mining and statistical modeling background
- Experience in data engineering in Big Data systems
- Expertise in designing Data Models for high performance and scalability
- Experience with Spark, Hadoop or other distributed frameworks
- Recent experience in working with complex analytical SQL queries on big Data and Scala
ADDITIONAL SUCCESS FACTORS
- Understanding Subscription based business
- Excellent written and verbal communication
- Self motivated, independent and proactive
- Ability to work with cross functional teams, set priorities and prioritize multiple projects simultaneously on tight deadlines
Description
- Performing adhoc data analysis
Build data engineering assets using Scala, Python and other big data SQL technologies
Operationalize the data engineering workflows
Build visualizations to communicate insights and analytics findings.
Presenting findings to other groups and senior management.
Education & Experience
- BA/BS/BE in a quantitative field (Statistics, Computer Science, Ops Research etc.)

APPLE IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER THAT IS COMMITTED TO INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY. WE ALSO TAKE AFFIRMATIVE ACTION TO OFFER EMPLOYMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO ALL APPLICANTS, INCLUDING MINORITIES, WOMEN, PROTECTED VETERANS, AND INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES. APPLE WILL NOT DISCRIMINATE OR RETALIATE AGAINST APPLICANTS WHO INQUIRE ABOUT, DISCLOSE, OR DISCUSS THEIR COMPENSATION OR THAT OF OTHER APPLICANTS.,Location


Cupertino, CA

Position


We’re looking to add a Technical Data Analyst to our team with strong communication and client skills. In order to succeed in this role, you’ll have a mix of data engineering, data analysis, and data visualization experience. You should be actively engaged and passionate about the technologies you are using, quick to learn, and excited to collaborate. The right person for this role is inspired by a work environment in which requirements and technologies vary from project to project, driven by a balance of the client’s needs and our expertise and experience.

Requirements
Deep understanding of BI methodologies, Data Architecture principals, Master data and metadata.
Proficiency in Tableau, Excel and Essbase
Working coding experience with Python, SQL and UNIX shell scripts required
Experience with developing ETLs from raw to curation layers including cleansing, transforming, deriving and aggregating data ( Tableau Prep, Airflow )
Experience working with relational databases, query authoring as well as working familiarity with a variety of databases ( Teradata , PostgresSQL )
Proven experience developing data visualizations, dashboards, and reporting in Tableau required
Ambitious, with the ability to work independently, or collaboratively within a cross functional team
Excellent written and verbal communications skills, attention to detail, and critical thinking

Benefits
Competitive compensation, including a retirement plan and an excellent healthcare package with vision and dental.
Two main Bay Area offices full of friendly people: one in the center of Oakland (near BART) and one in the heart of Cupertino.
Support for employee productivity and continued learning in the forms of hardware, software, learning materials, training, and conferences.

Beez contribute in all the ways they want and can. Beezwax is committed to employee growth, and encourages Beez to develop new ways to contribute.

We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.

Looking forward to hearing from you!

Apply

Do you know someone who might be interested? Let them know!,We have Job Opportunity for Data Analyst at Redwood Shores, CA with direct client

Duration: 3-6months. Contract only

Job description:
· Interprets results using a variety of techniques, ranging from simple data aggregation via statistical analysis to complex data mining.
· Designs, develops, implements and maintains business solutions.
· Works directly with clients and project and business leaders to identify analytical requirements.
· Requires a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and 0-3 years of experience in the field or in a related area.
· Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field.
· Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.
· Works under immediate supervision. Typically reports to a supervisor.
If you have the above qualification and interested to apply please reply with your updated resume, contact no. and expected pay rate and I will contact you to discuss further.,Posted: Feb 20, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200146100
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, new ideas have a way of becoming great products, services, and customer experiences very quickly. Bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

As the Senior Data Analyst within the Worldwide Business Process Re-engineering organization, you will own and be part of global projects from Inception through Benefits Realization. As a data and reporting leader you will drive transformational data and analytics initiatives for improving the effectiveness and efficiency for sales business functions. Having the right blend of technological depth, Sales process and systems expertise along with program management skills is key to the success of the role. You will be expected to manage end to end delivery of large to small scale projects in the data & analytics area through active leadership and partner management, both at strategic and tactical levels. Very Strong presentation skills and executive presence, with effective communication to create impact and influence both at executive and mid-level management.
Key Qualifications
Deep understanding of BI methodologies, Data Architecture principals, Master data and metadata.
Ability to support the creation of single source of truth for performance monitoring leveraging agreed upon data definitions, create a common data foundation, and semantic layers to be consumed by business.
Deliver highly available, reliable, innovative large-scale data warehousing solutions to facilitate data induction, build optimized aggregates and building reporting solutions.
Provide leadership and expertise to define solutions architecture and strategies at all layers, for next generation reporting platform with high performance and scalability.
Experience with a broad range of technology capabilities in BI and DW, with industry trends and new age platforms.
Deep knowledge and hands-on experience working with database technologies like Teradata, MySql, Oracle and Vertica and multiple BI platforms such as Business Objects, Tableau, and others.
Strong understanding of operational processes, systems and data in multiple areas of Sales & operations; Sales B2B, B2C, Forecasting, Quote to Cash, Pipeline management.
Understanding of data design and architecture principles for complex business scenarios.
Identify patterns, attribute hierarchies and data relationships and organize into data dictionaries, create standardized definitions for metrics and critical metrics.
Analytical and problem-solving experience, exposure to large-scale systems and some experience writing code.
Strong business analysis skills - capturing and documenting requirements, understanding business impacts and tradeoffs, conducting interviews and workshops, proposing solutions, documentation and process mapping, etc.
Literacy with MS Word, MS Excel, and basic project planning tools.
Work in a matrix organization and navigate effectively through Communication and relationship building.
Define and drive the long-term vision & develop strategic roadmaps to achieve the vision and goal.
Bring a strong sense of execution and accountability for the overall success of the program.
Experience planning, managing, delivering medium (6-8 month) to large (8-12+ month) programs/projects.
Experience across multiple industry sectors is preferred, with High Tech a must have.
Broad Sales B2C, B2B, and supply chain management expertise
Articulate the technology, requirements, goals and landmarks of the program working with multiple teams.
Provide technical guidance, direction and problem solving to engineering team members. Drive technical excellence in software development and solution design.
Use and help chip in to standard software engineering processes(Waterfall/Agile), improve development methodologies over time. Engage with architects, engineers, BI developers across regions and departments to deliver the program.
Description
This role will be part of Sales BPR team that supports Worldwide Sales at Apple and the role requires a deep understanding of sales & supply chain functions to handle complex, global initiatives supporting a wide range of capital and non-capital initiatives. You will be responsible for leading cross-organizational teams to define, build and roll-out innovative data solutions that improve strategic and operational decision making capability, builds customer satisfaction, drives revenue and increases efficiency.

The role will work with senior management and global teams to define technological and capability roadmaps, driving improvements of the organization, processes and use of systems and data for Apple's Sales organization. This effort is directly linked to our customer strategy and needs to be forward-looking.

THIS MAY INCLUDE:
Excellent understanding of business intelligence technologies, data architecture concepts and methodologies
Understanding future strategies and directions to anticipate needs.
Building internal and external expertise driving standard methodology and innovation.
Translate complex business requirements into scalable technical solutions meeting Data Warehousing standards
Solid understanding of analytics needs and proactive-ness to build generic solutions to improve the efficiency.
Proposing and driving new solutions that may be implemented WW or addressing local processes.
Strong data and BI analysis skills - detailed analysis and definitions of important metrics, measures, business logic and calculations, hierarchies and aggregations, source system analysis, reporting requirements, etc.
Ability to understand and influence the technical solution and scalability concerns.
ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
In partnership with the business function, BPR (Business Process Re-engineering) and IS&T (Information Systems & Technology), this individual will:
Serve as liaison to Sales teams to develop solution capabilities to support business analytics requirements.
Partners with key teams to solicit business user feedback to identify improvement opportunities for implementation.
Consults business partners and team members within Sales, Sales Finance, Operations and Finance partners.
Define and drive programs and projects relevant to the delivery of BI, reporting, and analytics capabilities.
Drives the design, development, implementation and management of projects/programs
Lead change. Implement new ideas effectively within the Apple culture. Influence decisions and change management through collaboration, leadership and a customer- focused approach
Develop and maintain key project governance documentation to ensure the proper amount of structure is applied to enable project success
Addresses critical issues, quickly assess and develop root cause analysis and problem solution for operations issues
Education & Experience
Bachelor’s degree is required. MS or MBA is preferred

7+ years of experience developing DW/BI solutions with 5+ years of managing programs in the data space

Strong process focus, ability to continuously improve and find opportunities for improvement in the business.,Posted: Jul 10, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200176847
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, new ideas have a way of becoming great products, services, and customer experiences very quickly. Bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

Do you love thinking analytically? Are you passionate about using your financial knowledge to navigate complex challenges? Just as our customers find value in Apple products, the Finance group finds value for both Apple and its shareholders. As part of this group, you’ll play an integral role in ensuring our day-to-day financial health. You and your team will support Apple’s growth, both top and bottom line, by applying the same level of innovation toward financial matters as we do toward our products and services. You’ll also collaborate with Apple teams across the world to develop more effective investment strategies and risk management. Finance is crucial to upholding our global dedication to excellence, and it is directly responsible for crafting the company’s future.

Join us, and you will have a meaningful role in continuing Apple’s legacy of efficiency and success. We are looking for an outgoing professional with high analytical capacity, creativity, and strong communication skills to support the Worldwide Sales Organization. The position requires the ability to understand and work with sophisticated data set in order to drive insights. The position will work cross-functionally with Sales, Finance and Technical teams to help develop new tools, processes and analysis for senior sales/finance executives.
Key Qualifications
KEY QUALIFICATIONS
At least 8 years project and/or data management experience
Technical understanding with ability to articulate complex technical issues in easy to understand business terms
Self-motivated, driven individual who is comfortable working in a global, fast-paced environment
Strong team orientation and collaborative style. Flexible demeanor and an ability to get involved in the details while maintaining a wider view
Excellent process management, planning, and organizational skills. Resilient and determined to ensure projects and deliverables are achieved, driving projects from inception to deployment
Strong verbal and written communication skills
Plus: Understanding of data management best practices to ensure quality data
Description
This role is a global role working on redesigning the way we capture, govern and process data from our channel partners. You will bring new innovative ideas to review the current process/system and to work on a new design of the process as well as the system. The current dataset is fundamental to manage the business and had gone through a test of time. This is an opportunity to improve and incorporate new technologies and analytics at an enterprise scale, with senior management support.
The ideal candidate is one who has experience on the collection, audit, governance and analytics of omni-channel partner data, ideally in the tech hardware industry. You will be able to work independently and have experience working cross-functionally with Sales, Operations, IT, Data Management and Business Re-Engineering teams, in ground-breaking projects.
You are a top performer in your career with a consistent track record of accomplishments. You should feel comfortable dealing with complex & ambiguous situations, with high analytical capacity, creativity, and strong interpersonal skills to support the project, managing the balance and prioritization between the various organizations.
Understand current process and system - recognise current challenges and identify areas of improvements. Challenge and create/design new efficiencies within process. Drive process changes and handle change.Ownership to drive multiple deliverables within the project.
Lead cross-functional relationship to drive and innovate new processes and design of solution.
Manage professional relationships with external partners, where required, to negotiate for data and/or improvements to data.
Communicate on status of tasks/activities, calling out risks at appropriate times.
Analyze large amount of data that team is working with and being able to present findings to partners.
Education & Experience
Bachelor's degree of a quantitative nature (Finance, Statistics, Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering, etc.),Cadence has an exciting opportunity for an Advace Data Analyast with their Hardware Systems Verification Materials Team. This person will analyze quality and reliability data and information and perform advanced statistical analysis. Other responsibilities include, but are not limited to the following:
Responsible for Quality System Maintenance.
Root cause analysis and implementation of corrective action for process related concerns.
Assist Quality manager in establishing, implementing and maintaining the quality management system.
Responsible for continual improvement activities to enhance the quality system, such as 5S, Kaizen lean methods, etc.
Develop training to build data analysis and corrective action processes
Interface with Engineering and Operations to ensure transfer to Production of new products are in accordance with approved data.
Conduct audits, including closing out audit findings, creating audits finding reports and determine proper corrective and preventive actions.
Analyze failure, corrective and preventive action to respond to customer complaints.
Create and maintain related procedures to data analysis and corrective action
Responsible for planning, organizing and managing the overall activities of receiving / outgoing quality functions.
Continuously improving QA receiving inspection process and procedures.
Ensure timely resolution of supplier failure, corrective actions and preventive actions.
Manage suppliers' performance and conduct audits.
Perform measurement of the customer satisfaction index
Work with supply chain and materials management to manage supplier quality issues
Develop the supplier's scorecard and present to the suppliers
Provide customers report and analysis
Work with internal manufacturing and suppliers to improve product quality and reliability
Prepare and manage the management review meetings
Prepare the quality instructions, procedures and customers requested reports
Requirements & Qualifications
BS or Master degree in science or 10 years related experience
A hands-on understanding of manufacturing and operations processes and procedures especially for Telecommunications industry.
Background in quality engineering background and familiarity with boards and system assembly
Develop reliability measurements (MTBF, DOA, IRR, YRR.)
Demonstrating the ability to organize, prioritize, manage staff, solve problems,
Achieve an understanding of the current process and procedures used in the electro-mechanical assembly area for standard product assembly
Determines quality improvement parameters by identifying statistical methods relevant to manufacturing processes.
Establishes statistical confidence by identifying sample size and acceptable error; determining levels of confidence,Intuit's Fraud Prevention team harnesses the power of data, technology, and people to protect our customers, partners, and business from fraud and abuse. The Fraud Prevention team is looking for a Senior Business Data Analyst who is excited to partner with product managers, engineers, and data scientists to deliver fresh insights and solutions to fight fraud.,Hello,

Hope you are doing great.

One of my clients is looking to fill this position immediately

Looking forward for your Quick Reply...

Job title: Data Analyst with Teradata Exp.

Work Location: Sunnyvale CA 94085

Duration of the project : 24+ months

Job Description:
Must Have Skills (Top 3 technical skills only) *
Teradata
Python
SAP BOBJ

Nice to have skills
Vertica
SAP HANA

Detailed Job Description
Coordinating with business upholders, application developers, and client management.
Providing essential inputs to the global teams supporting the applications.
Incident management, coordinating periodic system upgrades, compliance related changes for the applications used by business teams for daytoday analysis, and trend reporting.
Reviewing application enhancements and new releases to work smoothly with the platforms.
Analyzing issues reported by business analysts and providing technical solutions.

Top 3 responsibilities you would expect the Subcon to shoulder and execute
Steadystate maintenance of business intelligence applications
Emergency modifications and data corrections.
Doing different housekeeping activities like application maintenance, technical version upgrades.,Sr. Analyst, Data Governance – Req AMGA679

As Sr Data Analyst in Data Governance Team, you are responsible for supporting the goals of the Data

Governance of transforming data to Company assets by improving data quality and delivering effective use of data and information. You will report to VP, Data Governance and Business Operations and work across functions.

Essential Functions:

This position is to provide the execution of data governance framework, policies, standards; and execution of the data stewardship at all levels of the organization.

v

Responsible for the data stewardship according to the data governance framework, policies, and standards in the applications and manual processes

v

Work closely with Business Functional Data Stewards of cross functions to improve data quality through upstream and downstream business processes

Operate tools of MDM to comply with data standards, business requirements, comply with data access security requirements, and are active in data management of data enrichment, data merging, deduplication, and other data management operational activates

v

Be accountable for integrity and quality of data at MDM

v

Provide data profile, data quality assessment, data metrics, and business analyses on data statistics

v

Work with database and system administrators to ensure and maintain the data quality and business analyses availability

Provide Business Intelligence of business analyses demonstrating the data assets and data monetarization

v

Work with IT and Data Governance team to implement data standards, and create metadata.

v

Work with IT, Business, and Data Governance team to manage data, data standards, and policies to meet the business needs

v

Work with IT, Business, and Data Governance team on application implementation or improvement activities

v

Perform ad hoc or interim manual processes to enhance the data usage

Skill Requirements:

v Oracle EDQ and CDM hands on experience

v Excellent verbal and written communication skills

v Ability to work with all levels of personnel and across functional groups

v Good understanding of databases and data structures

v Ability to perform data profiling and evaluation

v Knowledge of basic data management principles and concepts

v Knowledge of how to create data standards, determine business data requirements, and business rules

Job Experience Required:

• 5+ years data quality and governance or similar data analysis experience required

• 5+ years of Oracle EDQ and CDM experience required

• 5+ years financial application of SFDC and Oracle experience required

• Experience of project management of cross functions

• SQL, Excel, Database, and PowerPoint skills required

Educational Requirements:

• B.S. degree in information technology, business, or equivalent combination of education and experience required

#LI-JN1,, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200171419
At Apple, we work every single day to build products that enrich people’s lives. Our Advertising Platforms group makes it possible for people around the world to easily access informational and imaginative content on their devices while helping publishers and developers promote and monetize their work. Our technology and services power advertising in Apple News and Search Ads in the App Store. Our platforms are highly performant, deployed at scale, and set new standards for enabling effective advertising while protecting user privacy.

The Ad Platforms Data Insights team is seeking a market research analyst to answer—with data and detailed analysis—the hard, open-ended questions required to operate, develop, and grow the business. In this role you will work as a key member of a data-centric team to identify the key information problems impacting our partners, build an investigative approach, apply your deep ad industry expertise, unlock the insights our business needs, and develop the action plan that moves the business forward!

A strong market research background is essential. You'll be responsible for conducting innovative qualitative and quantitative research—internal research as well as leading independent, 3rd party studies. Impactful research is more than just compiling statistics; you'll use your expertise to interpret findings, be prescriptive, and translate analyses into actionable business recommendations. Successful candidates will offer a strategic perspective, sound business judgment, strong intellectual curiosity, and a collaborative working style. You'll work hand in hand with data scientists, engineers, and business stakeholders in a multi-functional team that moves fast and delivers results.

Key Qualifications
10+ years of experience in data and market analysis, consulting, and/or market research roles in the marketing and digital advertising field. Preferred focus on paid search or performance marketing
Possess a deep understanding of the app landscape, mobile space, and digital advertising
Do you consider yourself highly analytical, intellectually curious, and having a consistent track record in quantitative and qualitative analysis?
You have experience managing third-party information and research providers (e.g., comScore, eMarketer, App Annie)
Proficiency with analytical tools, statistical packages, and basic data access; experience with programming skills in Python, Java/Scala, and SQL is a plus
Experience working effectively with business, data science, and engineering partners to meet the data needs of the business. Translating business needs into analytical requirements
Ability to communicate the results of analyses in a clear and effective manner with sales, product, and leadership teams to influence the overall strategy of the product
Ability to operate comfortably and effectively in a dynamic, highly cross-functional, rapidly changing environment.
Strong organizational skills with attention to detail
Proficiency in Spanish or Portuguese is a plus!

Description
- Support Product Marketing, Sales, and the Executive Team with analysis for product performance and customer insight
Empower the global Sales teams with insights to inform and fulfill their strategic objectives and goals for every fiscal quarter
Quantify the impact of product, sales, and marketing initiatives on customer happiness and future behavior
Lead business analytic projects through all phases, including defining investigations, exploring data, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of results and work you're doing
Design and evaluate experiments that help define opportunities for increased usage, improved marketplace performance, and greater customer happiness
Monitor usage metrics, understanding business-based explanations for large scale trends, and patterns in customer lifecycle behavior
Education & Experience
Bachelor of Arts or Science in a quantitative field of study including business, statistics, math, economics or a related discipline. Graduate degree in a marketing-focused discipline a plus

Additional Requirements,At Cadence, we hire and develop leaders and innovators who want to make an impact on the world of technology. Cadence has an exciting opportunity for an Advace Data Analyast with their Hardware Systems Verification Materials Team. This person will analyze quality and reliability data and information and perform advanced statistical analysis. Other responsibilities include, but are not limited to the following:: + Responsible for Quality System Maintenance. + Root cause analysis and implementation of corrective action for process related concerns. + Assist Quality manager in establishing, implementing and maintaining the quality management system. + Responsible for continual improvement activities to enhance the quality system, such as 5S, Kaizen lean methods, etc. + Develop training to build data analysis and corrective action processes + Interface with Engineering and Operations to ensure transfer to Production of new products are in accordance with approved data. + Conduct audits, including closing out audit findings, creating audits finding reports and determine proper corrective and preventive actions. + Analyze failure, corrective and preventive action to respond to customer complaints. + Create and maintain related procedures to data analysis and corrective action + Responsible for planning, organizing and managing the overall activities of receiving / outgoing quality functions. + Continuously improving QA receiving inspection process and procedures. + Ensure timely resolution of supplier failure, corrective actions and preventive actions. + Manage suppliers' performance and conduct audits. + Perform measurement of the customer satisfaction index + Work with supply chain and materials management to manage supplier quality issues + Develop the supplier's scorecard and present to the suppliers + Provide customers report and analysis + Work with internal manufacturing and suppliers to improve product quality and reliability + Prepare and manage the management review meetings + Prepare the quality instructions, procedures and customers requested reports Requirements & Qualifications + BS or Master degree in science or 10 years related experience + A hands-on understanding of manufacturing and operations processes and procedures especially for Telecommunications industry. + Background in quality engineering background and familiarity with boards and system assembly + Develop reliability measurements (MTBF, DOA, IRR, YRR...) + Demonstrating the ability to organize, prioritize, manage staff, solve problems, + Achieve an understanding of the current process and procedures used in the electro-mechanical assembly area for standard product assembly + Determines quality improvement parameters by identifying statistical methods relevant to manufacturing processes. + Establishes statistical confidence by identifying sample size and acceptable error; determining levels of confidence We're doing work that matters. Help us solve what others can't. Cadence plays a critical role in creating the technologies that modern life depends on. We are a global electronic design automation company, providing software, hardware, and intellectual property to design advanced semiconductor chips that enable our customers create revolutionary products and experiences. Thanks to the outstanding caliber of the Cadence team and the empowering culture that we have cultivated for over 25 years, Cadence continues to be recognized by Fortune Magazine as one of the 100 Best Companies to Work For. ?Our shared passion for solving the world's toughest technical challenges, our dedication to pushing the limits of the industry, and our drive to do meaningful work differentiates the people of Cadence. Cadence is committed to creating a diverse environment and is proud to be an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, sex, age, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, status as a veteran, basis of disability, or any other protected class.,Posted: Mar 10, 2020
Weekly Hours: 40
Role Number:
200100335
Imagine what you could do here. At Apple, new ideas have a way of becoming extraordinary products, services, and customer experiences very quickly. Bring passion and dedication to your job and there's no telling what you could accomplish.

Apple’s Strategic Data Solutions (SDS) team leads efforts to mitigate fraud, waste and abuse across Apple’s various lines of business. The team has an immediate opening for an outstanding analyst who is interested in working closely with partner teams; understanding their processes and analytic needs; and developing technical solutions that can drive significant impact that benefits Apple.

The candidate must work well in collaborative environments with minimal formal structure and be comfortable in uncertain environments with competing priorities. The candidate must possess solid business acumen, a strong quantitative / technical background, natural curiosity, and the ability to effectively shift between communications styles based on the audience (technical peer review through leadership update).
Key Qualifications
Experience applying analytical techniques to provide solutions to real business problems
Creativity to go beyond current tools to deliver best solution to the problem
Experience with SQL, Hive, Spark and big data systems and tools
Programming skills in Python, Java, C++, or similar language
Ability to tell meaningful stories with data
Strong interpersonal skills with ability to develop strong partnerships at all levels
Strong verbal / written communication skills
(Desired) Supply chain / manufacturing / financial background
Inquisitiveness and a desire for continuous self-improvement and development of new skills
Experience providing technical and analytic mentoring / coaching to teammates
Comfort working independently and making key decisions on projects
Description
• Support discovery of business problems
• Develop relationships with business partners and serve as analytic point of contact
• Perform data discovery and create proof of concepts
• Perform ad-hoc and reoccurring statistical analyses
• Work with data warehouse architects and software developers to generate business intelligence solutions for partner teams
• Present results of analyses to business units and senior leadership
Education & Experience
• MS in technical field (math, statistics, engineering, computer science, analytics, or similar),Below are the Job Details
Title: Data Analyst-IT II
Duration: 6+ months
Location: Redwood City, CA 94065

General Info: Performs analysis of user access data, formats and organizes data for access reviews. Follows up with individuals to ensure assigned work is completed by deadlines. Requires a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and 3-6 years of experience in the field or in a related area. Relies on limited experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals. Performs a variety of tasks. Works under general supervision. A certain degree of creativity and latitude is required. Typically reports to a supervisor or manager

Specific Job Details:
A key component of Security for our internal systems is ensuring user access levels are appropriate. Our Access review program is performed quarterly and takes all 12 weeks to complete. This role will be asked to take direction from the Access Review Program Manager who will detail the work that needs to be done each quarter. Being detailed oriented is critical for this role as there will be a lot of data sources and all work will need to be tracked and stored as evidence for internal and external auditors.

1. This role will help facilitate reviews of user access across dozens of systems. Specifically, the tasks include:
• Creating Service Requests to track each review
• Compiling user entitlement data from in scope environments and from Oracle's Identity Management system
• Formatting data extracted from systems to ensure easy review and analysis
• Create and initiate survey to be completed by designated reviewers.
• Follow up on completion of surveys until 100%, and ensure deadlines are met.
2. Work with Oracle's Identity Management team to use OIM functionality to certify user entitlements.
• Confirm identified reviewers by asking management to review list of reviewers.
• Compile user entitlement data, ensuring audit evidence is captured effectively
• Submit Service Request to OIM team detailing requirements for certification creation,Healthgrades is focused on providing trusted information that helps consumers and providers make meaningful connections. As a Data Quality Analyst, you will be helping build the future of Healthgrades' enterprise data solutions, enabling health systems, hospitals and providers to better reach those consumers who are seeking care. In this hands on role, you will manage your own workload, while also leading a team of skilled and dedicated engineers.The Healthgrades enterprise data platform will enable health systems to create a holistic patient view, eliminate data silos, and improve patient experience. This enterprise platform will bring together once disparate data into a single platform, breaking down data silos and making data more useful across an entire organization. The Healthgrades data platform will also serve as the underlying data management solution for powering Healthgrades CRM and other customer experience execution systems while enabling health systems to reach beyond traditional efforts to improve and manage patient experience and patient engagement.This is an exciting opportunity to work on word-class products, designed from scratch, and using the latest technology stacks.What You Will Do:* Work with Development, Test, and Product Management Teams to design and implement manual and automated validation strategies for functional, integrated end-to-end testing* Identify gaps in the quality assurance and testing processes, generate solutions, and drive iterative improvement* Review product requirements, specifications, and technical design documents* Participate in estimating, prioritizing, planning, and coordinating testing activities* Assist in designing, developing, and executing automation scripts, as well as identifying, documenting, and tracking bugs* Assist in performing regression testing when bugs are resolved* Help ensure compliance with client, agency, and company guidelines and standardsWhat You Will Bring:* 3+ years of experience working with large scale Enterprise Data Warehouse, Data Integration, Data Migration, and/or Data Pipeline & Reporting, and upgrading projects in legacy or cloud based architecture* Well-versed in creating Test Plans, Test Reporting, and stakeholder management* Strong SQL experience, with an understanding of tools such as Alteryx, Talend, Snowflake, Stitch, and Reltio* Experience developing data validation frameworks from scratch and/or using data validation tools* Basic understanding of master data management and Data Pipeline & Reporting concepts* Experience conducting and running data defect triage meetings with various cross-functional teams* Bonus: experience creating Test Automation scripts/frameworks, Salesforce experience, and healthcare industry experienceWhy Healthgrades?At Healthgrades, we recognize that our people drive our greatest achievements. We are passionate about maintaining a fulfilling, rewarding and high-energy work environment while setting the stage for your continued success.* Meaningful Work - empowering consumers with data to make the right healthcare decisions for themselves and their families* Changing the Game - dynamic culture with career advancement opportunities* Community Builders - partners of local charity organizations, Go-Green efforts and wellness initiatives* Robust Perks - generous PTO, inclusive healthcare, learning & development programs, 401k contributions, tuition repayment, family planning resources & more!,Lightspeed Systems is looking for a passionate Data Analyst to transform our data into insights and insights into actions that could affect millions of K-12 students.

Using the latest tools and processes, Lightspeed Systems is able to maximize our technology offerings and deliver unparalleled service and support. The ideal candidate should be highly skilled in all aspects of data analytics, including storage and modeling, data mining, and storytelling with visualizations. Additionally, you should be committed to providing data in an ethical, sustainable, and self-service manner for continued innovation and growth by our various stakeholders.

ABOUT THE ROLE
Develop and maintain datastores by acquiring data from primary and secondary sources, writing scripts that will make our data evaluation process flexible and scalable
Define and implement data acquisition and integration logic, selecting appropriate combination of methods and tools within defined technology stack to ensure optimal scalability and performance
Proactively analyze data to answer key questions from stakeholders or out of self-initiated curiosity with an eye for what drives business performance, investigating and communicating areas for improvement in efficiency and productivity
Assist in interpreting and validating statistical models and A/B test results
Participate in strategic and tactical planning discussions - interface with business customers, gathering requirements and delivering complete self-service reporting solutions.
Work closely with project managers to understand and maintain focus on their analytical needs, including identifying critical metrics and KPIs, and deliver actionable insights to relevant decision-makers
Create and maintain rich interactive visualizations through data interpretation and analysis integrating various reporting components from multiple data sources
Applicants must be authorized to work for ANY employer in the US. We are unable to sponsor or take over sponsorship of employment Visa at this time.

ABOUT YOU
2+ years of relevant experience in a business analytics, business intelligence or comparable data engineering or data science role
Strong communication and interpersonal skills as you'll work cross-functionally across the organization (marketing, finance, sales, etc.you will work with every department)
Familiar with various supervised and unsupervised modeling techniques including but not limited to Decision Trees, Regressions, SVM, K-Means, Dimensionality Reduction, and others
A/B test experience preferred
Must be an analytical and creative thinker: wherever possible, you look to resolve questions through data and measurement
Strong attention to detail and accuracy you will be organizing and disseminating significant amounts of information on which business decisions will be made
You are skilled at being a storyteller with data
Online web analytics experience preferred but not required (measuring and tracking website behavior, interaction, pathing and fallout)
Desired Tools/Languages
SQL
Python, R, Perl, SAS, or other statistical packages/scripting languages
Experience with Cloud Environments and Tools (AWS, GCP, Azure)
Experience with traditional data stores (PostgreSQL, SQL Server, MySQL), NoSQL datastores (Cassandra, DynamoDB), and file system stores (HDFS, S3)
Experience with BI tools (Tableau, Looker, SiSense, etc)P
We require all qualified applicants, as part of the application process, to complete a set of assessments. We invite you to jump start your application for this role by completing our assessment (it will only take 7-10 minutes).

ABOUT US

Education is undergoing a technology revolution with new devices and tools being added to the classroom every day and IT departments are responsible for keeping all this technology managed, safe and working. That is where we come in! Lightspeed Systems, ed-tech provider and leader in K-12 device filtering for 20 years, partners with schools to make learning safe, managed and mobile. Learn more at www.lightspeedsystems.com.

We love our employees, and we show it. A sneak peek into our BENEFITS & PERKS include:
Health -- Medical, dental and vision insurance with healthy company contribution toward premiums.
Wellness -- Lightspeed kicks cash into your HSA if you participate our HDHP. Employees are provided an adjustable desk and onsite gyms at some offices. Healthy Holiday and PTO policy.
Retirement -- 401(k) matching up to 6%
Perks -- Fully stocked kitchen with snacks and beverages. Some lunches provided as well!,Global Resale is looking for a Data and Reporting Analyst!

The Company:

Global Resale is a full-service, international resell and reverse logistics business focused on the mobile, IT, and electronics sectors. Global Resale partners with the leading manufacturers, carriers, lessors, retailers, resellers, and large corporate accounts to handle their worldwide reverse logistics needs. With state-of-the-art processing centers in Texas (Global Headquarters) and Essex (European Headquarters), Global Resale serves as a single-source solution for its partners, offering the full range of reverse logistics capabilities, including takeback, collection, inventory, data sanitization, repair, harvesting, and resell.

The Role:

Global Resale is seeking a Data and Reporting Analyst to help grow our Information Technology platform. We are a rapidly growing, Austin based company, in an exciting industry undergoing transformation - we can promise a fast paced and dynamic environment.

We are looking for a critical thinking professional with an analytical mindset, super strong MS SQL skills and Power BI expertise. You’ll work closely with technical, operations and business resources to retrieve, analyze and interpret large volume of complex data from a variety of sources. We are looking for cloud first solutions built on Azure to help integrate and streamline our legacy platforms, stored procedures, and logic to reduce overhead and complexity.

Responsibilities:
Understand legacy queries and data schema, with ability to transform these into new models for reporting, specifically Power Bi
Understand workflow for each user type and necessary data structures to power that business unit
Create forecasting models and data models
Work with business unit leadership to develop new workflows, KPI’s, and reporting
Ensure ad hoc and standard operational reports are delivered accurately and on time
Test workflows, forecasting and data models, reports, troubleshoot issues from business users
Train business users where applicable i.e. report creation, data entry/upload, new tools
Analyze designated performance measures/reports including financial, satisfaction and operational metrics
Develop Power BI reports and dashboards as required to support financial and operational decision making.
Support data load and update actions as required.
Transform low-value datasets into highly structured and consistent datasets for use by analysts and reporting tools
Bonus: Create and Update stored procedures, temporary tables, complex joins, and triggers
Qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree in technical field or equivalent experience
3-5 years of demonstrated success in analysis and reporting related roles
Ability to communicate complex quantitative analysis in a clear, precise, and actionable manner.
Skilled in managing multiple projects and stakeholder interests with timeliness, accuracy, and quality.
Expertise with Microsoft 365, Power Bi, Excel
Experience with Salesforce a plus
Experience working with global teams
Azure experience – logic apps, automation account
Experience with B2B and inter-company process flow
Bonus: Experience with implementing/moving to new technology stacks
Bonus: Azure Synapse, Azure Data Factory, ETL, and leading technology transforms in the past,Responsibilities include:

• Facilitating operational error and discrepancy scenario resolution relating to service order input, database management and emergency call response
• Identify data inconsistencies and conflicts in address data sets
• Work towards aggressive timelines to maximize data accuracy
• Complex data analysis to initiate, define and manage database migration efforts
• Fielding customer and user feedback relative to workflow and software use
• Efficiently managing external relationships with telecommunication service providers and other stakeholders
• Collaborating with internal staff to augment and maintain high levels of service quality and data integrity
• Promoting a value adding partnership between 911DM and hosted agencies
• Other duties as assigned


Knowledge & Skills:
• Ability to understand and follow complex oral and written instructions, and perform accurate work in a timely manner
• Ability to utilize application software (e.g., Excel) to perform analyses, generate reports, sort and categorize data • Exhibit strong verbal and written communication skills.
• Ability to organize, prioritize and meet deadlines
• Ability to manage multiple tasks and function as part of a team
• Demonstrate a high degree of initiative, detail-oriented and sound judgement
• Exhibit strong problem-solving skills and data input accurately at a reasonable rate of speed
• Ability to work in an office environment and adhere to company policies and procedures The position will start as a remote employee (work from home) and will transition into an office environment.
• Must live in the greater Austin area.
Must have experience in 9-1-1 service order processing,NVIDIA is looking for passionate data engineers to join our Cloud Software Engineering Team in GeForce NOW. In this role, you will play a significant part in helping to craft and guide the future of Cloud Gaming!

GeForce NOW is NVIDIA's Cloud Gaming service streaming games at the highest quality to any and every user regardless of their device types and capabilities – low-end PCs, Macs, or mobile devices. Using the most advanced GPUs and software, GeForce NOW transforms the gaming experience with always up-to-date games on always the latest hardware, a streaming experience rivaling that of a local PC, and near-instant launch – just click and play! For more details see https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/geforce/products/geforce-now/

As a data analyst at NVIDIA, you design, implement and maintain our cloud data systems for performance and reliability. You will be responsible for tuning and configuring our data platforms and writing sophisticated SQL queries that extract valuable statistics from millions of metrics. You will interact with other engineering teams who want to build services on your platform supporting them in the design and build phases.

What you'll be doing:
Build, design and implement scalable data solutions in SQL and NoSQL
Write sophisticated and optimized SQL Queries that span millions of data points
Craft reliable data ingestion Pipelines in Apache AirFlow for new data sources and post-processing existing data sets
Build, develop and maintain data models, reporting systems, data automation systems, dashboards and performance metrics support that support key business decisions
Work with multi-functional teams to prioritize work and drive system solutions by clearly articulating business needs
Ensure that data is secure and handled responsibly with appropriate access controls and audit trails
Prepare and maintain documentation detailing configuration of deployed solutions
What we need to see:
Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science or relevant work experience
3+ years experience with SQL query development, preferably Postgres
2+ years of experience designing large-scale data platforms
Experience with Prometheus metrics and architecting relevant Grafana dashboards that present data in a highly understandable UI
Proficient in Python3 programming and developing AirFlow Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs)
Experience building cloud scale data solutions in AWS or similar provider
Experience with high throughput transactional systems
Excellent interpersonal, and written communication skills
Comfortable working in a multifaceted, highly collaborative environment
Ways to stand out from the crowd:
Savviness with complex SQL queries and knowledge of database technologies including window functions
Show experience in building and managing metric systems, data lakes and transactional systems
Experience with Python analytic libraries such as Pandas and NumPy
Experience with TimeScaleDB
Familiarity with logging solutions such as Splunk and SumoLogic
Experience building SaaS/PaaS enterprise applications
Experience supporting 24/7 services
Experience with NoSQL DBs such as Cassandra and InfluxDB
A track record of solving complex problems with elegant solutions
NVIDIA is widely considered to be one of the technology world’s most desirable employers. We have some of the most forward-thinking and talented people in the world working for us. If you're creative, self-motivated and enjoy having fun, then what are you waiting for apply today.

NVIDIA is committed to fostering a diverse work environment and proud to be an equal opportunity employer. As we highly value diversity in our current and future employees, we do not discriminate (including in our hiring and promotion practices) on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, gender expression , sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, disability status or any other characteristic protected by law.,The Senior Claims Data Analyst conducts statistical research and analysis for select PRM clients and provides recommendations to client teams and clients. The Senior Claims Data Analyst also serves as a technical leader within the team and works closely with the Provider Strategist in leveraging claims and other data assets to solve business problems and seek out opportunities.What you will do:* Identifies data needs of PRM customers and determines appropriate methods for researching and collecting data* Conducts research in collaboration with the Provider Strategist and the DCD in support of customers' needs* Gather requirements for client projects and make recommendations based on best practices* Validates quality and integrity of new and existing data sources* Reviews and documents data analysis methodology* Conducts analysis and confirms results* Documents quality assurance process and any variations in findings* Partners with Data Science and other resources to gather data and specifications* Documents and communicates findings and insights to business unit leaders and/or clients* Develops analytic packages for recurring client business problems that are scalable and repeatable* Primary point of contact for presenting results to the client. Engages the audience by contextualizing the data in an understandable way.* Works to make complex, data-heavy research clear and understandable to non-technical audiences.* Reports on business unit metrics and/or key performance indicators* Assists in the development of recommendations, communications, process improvements, etc. based on findings and insights* Serves as a subject matter expert in claims data and analysis and serves as a mentor to other analysts and other team members.* Conducts quality assurance for Data Analysts to ensure accuracy and validity of research and analysisWhat you will bring:* Bachelor's degree in Business, Analytics, or equivalent experience* 3+ years' experience analyzing claims data* Advanced with SQL coding and Excel with pivot tables and formulas* Experience with BI tools such as Tableau* 5+ years' experience in data analytics* Ability to develop and apply data modeling methodologies and assess and address data quality concerns* Ability to translate data findings into actionable recommendations and process improvements* Ability to coach and advise co-workers on analytics best practices* Ability to set priorities and manage time to complete tasks and meet deadlinesAt Healthgrades, we recognize that our people drive our greatest achievements. We are passionate about maintaining a fulfilling, rewarding and energetic work environment while setting the stage for continued success.* Meaningful Work - Connecting millions with their healthcare providers* Changing the Game - evolving culture with career advancement opportunities* Community Builders - partnering with local charity and wellness initiatives* Robust Perks - generous PTO, 401k contributions, tuition assistance, entertainment discounts and more!,ASSOCIATE SALESFORCE.COM DATA STEWARD & ANALYSTData Stewardship is responsible for the integrity of the SalesForce.com (SFDC) database for the primary use of the global Cloud Protection & Licensing (CP&L) Sales Teams. The SFDC database is the primary Sales CRM application to manage Leads, Accounts, Contacts Opportunities and Quotes for Forecasting. This information provides Sales Management with the ability to forecast, and manage company deals through multiple calendar periods.Secondarily, the daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly and annual management of this database will provide for automation of integrated applications (Oracle, ServiceNow, CRM, GTO HUB, Entitlement Applications WPS, Licensors, Cipher Portal) and synchronized data (Asset Management, Maintenance & Subscription Renewal generation, and Cipher Partner Portal). Data Steward Ownership of this vital information is the entry point and front line for all company deals.Thirdly, the management of data is utilized by our Marketing department for its efforts in providing content, promoting product solutions to prospects, customers and our partners.A week in the life of an Associate SalesForce.com Data Steward & Analyst* You will manage the SFDC Support inbox and delegate requests.* You will manage daily, weekly, monthly and quarterly data processes.* You will provide excellent customer service in a timely manner.* You will work in SFDC database to maintain and improve data.* You will maintain any new updates with all processes that require support input. .* You will participate in the full application life cycle of SFDC testing, deployment and customer support.* You will be supporting 800 and growing users and 20 office worldwide.* You manage manual and mass data editing, updating and generation.* You will be the troubleshoot user, and inter-department requests for data-related corrections, updates and analytic tools (dashboard and reports)..* You will manage data-related projects; liaise with other internal departments to resolve data discrepancies.* You will update database field information supporting the global team of Sales, Marketing, Finance, Customer Service and Management users.* You will work on cipher tech partner clean up - review operationalizing the tech partners, improve onboarding and adding logo process. Work to make sure tech partners are putting Thales on their web page and advertising our relationship.Knowledge, Skills and Experience:* To succeed at this job, you must be: Fluent with SalesForce.com Classic, and beginner to intermediate understanding of SalesForce.com Lightening. Preferable beginner to basic understanding of Oracle data (how to view data and pull reports). Duties will include, but are not limited to: Understanding and intuitive in data standardization, and basic User Role/Profile/Sharing customizations within SFDC. Ability to independently review, research, and analyze data* You must be fluent in English.* We would like someone to join our team who is passion for data, information, and improving available information. Professional with a methodological approach to tasks, you must be able to effectively prioritize and organize your workload to support the team accordingly, contributing towards the highest standards of service we provide for our internal customers.* You must have a Bachelor's Degree Computer Science, Business Administration or equivalent experience can be substituted for degree.* We are looking for someone with 3 years experience of working in a busy support and administration environment, ideally in sales administration. 1 year experience with DemandTools experience. Strong IT skills and good working knowledge of Microsoft Office.* Travel: Occasional 25% or lessEmployees are required to perform the duties of this position, or any Gemalto position, in compliance with all company policies, procedures, practices, and processes, whether written or verbal, which Gemalto, in its sole discretion, may change periodically, including, but not limited to, those implemented to ensure product, physical plant, information systems and technology security, along withal federal, state and local regulations and public policies. Protect Gemalto assets from unauthorized access, disclosure, modification, destruction or interference. React and help resolve security events or security risks reported by employees. Ensure responsibility is assigned to the individual for actions taken.Gemalto, a Thales Company, is an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer. It is our policy to provide equal employment opportunity for all employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex national origin, marital status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, veteran's status, or other protected group status. We support and apply this policy through a program of affirmative action. This includes special efforts to employ and advance within our organization, qualified members of protected groups. Applicants may request reasonable accommodation to participate in the hiring process, please direct your inquiries to the Human Resources Department at careers.america@gemalto.com,Duration & Type: 6+ months Contract with a Pharmaceutical industry client

Location: Fort Worth, Texas

Responsibilities:
Serve as team member for supporting day to day master data activities in SAP Integrated Business Planning (IBP)
Partner with S&OP team to manage master data like customer master, transportation lanes, product master, and location master. Includes following up with S&OP teams to ensure proper approval has been received prior to master data changes.
Monitor the master data maintenance work workflow to ensure all requests are completed within defined SLA
Assist with setting direction for maintenance of master data, data standardization, and data governance
Ensure additional documentation is created as needed and existing documentation is properly maintained
Monitor master data quality and support related tasks (i.e. executing data quality reports) to ensure high level of data accuracy and completeness
Partner with IT COE to ensure master data interfaces/error logs are monitored and all issues resolved accordingly
Support any master data related activities for other IBP regional deployments and SAP upgrade releases
Provide training to additional resources as needed to ensure redundancy and business continuity
Assist with identifying any gaps in process and develops proposals for future requirements to mitigate them
Assist with testing system updates and functional changes to ensure the system continues to meet business objectives and user requirements
Additional duties, as assigned
Required:
Must have an undergraduate degree in one of these – Supply Chain, Information Systems, or Computer Science
Minimum 2 years experience in data analytics or master data
Minimum 2 years experience with querying language like (SQL)
Prefer at least 1 year experience with SAP ECC, SAP APO, or SAP IBP
Experience in pharmaceutical supply chain or manufacturing environment preferred
Required Skills: Data Analyst, Data Analytics, Data Governance
Additional Preferred Skills: SQL, Supply Chain, Workflow, Business Continuity, Business Planning, Data Quality, Documentation, Training
For consideration, please send resume to career@infoquestgroup.com,Strong ability to examine physical data and infer relationships to business context and requirements* Strong understanding of LEAN AGILE or other iterative development methodologies with practical exposure to these techniques* Ability to write SQL against various DB management systems: Oracle, Teradata, HIVE, Impala, SQL Server* 7+ years of experience in financial services* Direct participation/support of technical delivery* Data preparation* Data management* Global Markets subject matter expertise* Data Dictionary Management* Blueprint,Job Description
Data Visualization Analyst

The Data Visualization Analyst will assist in the company data analytics / architecture operations in developing analytical reporting and insightful dashboard solutions. They will further assist in data sourcing, cleansing, wrangling, blending, integration and analytics. The role is expected to be a key contributor to ongoing digital systems and business process transformation initiatives. Successful candidates will have strong data analysis backgrounds and experience in supporting business stakeholders in decision making.

This is a direct hire role or contract to hire role in Charlotte metro NC. The salary range is $115,000 - $125,000- plus benefits and bonus potential

The day to day includes but not limited to Providing clear, continuous, and consistent data analytics in projects as well as in ad-hoc analysis Queries data sources, analyzes data, identifies correlations, patterns, clustering and then builds polished reports and dashboard solutions across the organization as well as identified gaps in master data, transactional data. Assist in defining and managing standards, guidelines, and processes to ensure data quality Develop business acumen and use analytics for critical evaluation of gaps and opportunities. Assists in acquiring data from primary and secondary data sources and improve / maintain databases.

Required Skills:
Intermediate understanding of system skills required to maintain/design SQL databases and an evolving Data Warehouse environment
Intermediate understanding of at least one SQL language with the ability to write, interpret and document complex queries
Able to take data from developers and BI group and make it easy to understand and present to the business unit and upper management
Expertise with data visualization software like Tableau and Looker
Strong business analyst skill set
Comfortable working in an environment of uncertainty with the ability to define and resolve business problems through innovative data solutions
Expertise with data modeling, analytics, visualization, strategy and KPI to produce dashboard key information
Have a curious business mindset with an ability to condense complex concepts and analysis into clear and concise takeaways that drive action
Effective and Professional oral and written communication skills
Must have proven high-quality internal & external customer service skills
Excellent interpersonal skills; confidence in speaking with executive leaders
Ability to exhibit a high-level of confidentiality in all matters
Must be able to handle high stress situations with poise and professionalism
Strong multitasking skills and comfortable in operating in a startup like culture
5 years of hands-on experience in visualization, data modeling and analytics
5 years of business experience with exposure to strategy formulation and/or business analytics
Ability to define/design dashboards and reports of data supported KPIs and benchmarks for audiences with all levels of technical expertise
Team player mindset, with strong interpersonal and influencing skills
Nice to Have:
Master’s Degree Preferred
Project management skills
Python is nice to have
Key Words:

Data

Visualization

Tableau

Looker

Analyst

Python

KPI

Business Analyst

Agile

SQL

Bachelor’s Degree Requirement: Yes
Company Description
PCR Staffing provides talent acquisition, staffing solutions, consulting services in the areas of Information Technology, Accounting / Finance , HR / Administration and Digital Media. Our clients are primarily based in the Charlotte NC area and range from startups to Fortune 100. Through customized solutions and connections with a broad range of companies ranging from local to global firms, our recruiters have your best interests in mind.. PCR Staffing is a recruiting agency that provides companies in across the nation with timely top talent and custom staffing strategies through four specialized hiring models: Direct Hire, Contract / Temporary, Contract To Hire, Statement Of Work. We have a trusted track record as a recruiting partner that delivers on its promises to our clients and the candidates that we represent. PCR Staffing is a top recruiting agency, providing employers highly qualified and talented candidates to fulfill their staffing needs. We have been in business in the Charlotte NC region since 1995 and have successfully helped over 100 clients nationwide with their talent acquisition needs and over 3000 candidates find their DREAM JOB!,Job Description
Business Data Analyst

We are looking for a passionate Data Analyst to support broad data management and data governance initiatives. The successful candidate will help turn data into information and insight to support business decisions and ensure data quality. The Data Analyst’s responsibilities include conducting data analysis as well as business analysis to identify gaps, new connections, correlation in data (master , transactional) and recommend opportunities & improvements. This position will require collaborations with key members of: IT, Advanced Analytics, Supply Chain, Vendor Relations, Finance, Sales and others. The position will ensure that the data has been received in the proper format, at the appropriate time, is correct, and is suitable for the intended end use.

This is a direct hire role or contract to hire role in Charlotte metro NC. The salary range is $110,000 - $125,000- plus benefits and bonus potential

Interpret data, profile and analyze results Analyze and manage master data across multiple domains such as Customer, Product, Consumer Analyze and manage 3rd Party and other external data sets. Build business processes diagrams to automate data management Locate and define new process improvement opportunities Leverage databases, analytics and other data tools to manage data Acquire data, profile and clean in collaboration with data stewards. Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets, trouble shoot data quality issues Work with management to prioritize business and information needs Define and document business requirements, data quality rules, improvement to data flows Proactively analyze data to increase quality as it relates to accuracy, completeness, consistency, integrity, timeliness, conformity, and validity Communicate and present to internal associates and external parties data standards & taxonomies to ensure data quality

Required Skills:
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Proficient in SQL (Ability to write complex queries profile, clean and standardize data)
Knowledge of scripting languages such as Python
Familiarity with Linear models and knowledge using statistical packages for analyzing datasets
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, visualization and presenting findings
Experience working in an agile team
Strong oral and written communication skills
Self-starter with excellent interpersonal skills, accountability, and project management skills
Ability to work under pressure in a demanding, fast-paced environment and to work under tight time constraints and meet deadlines.
Bachelors in Computer Science, Information Management or Data Science.
Nice to Have:
Master’s Degree Preferred
Project management skills
Proficient in Python
Key Words:

Data

Queries

Analyst

Python

Scripting

Analytic

Data Quality

Agile

SQL

Bachelor’s Degree Requirement: Yes
Company Description
PCR Staffing provides talent acquisition, staffing solutions, consulting services in the areas of Information Technology, Accounting / Finance , HR / Administration and Digital Media. Our clients are primarily based in the Charlotte NC area and range from startups to Fortune 100. Through customized solutions and connections with a broad range of companies ranging from local to global firms, our recruiters have your best interests in mind.. PCR Staffing is a recruiting agency that provides companies in across the nation with timely top talent and custom staffing strategies through four specialized hiring models: Direct Hire, Contract / Temporary, Contract To Hire, Statement Of Work. We have a trusted track record as a recruiting partner that delivers on its promises to our clients and the candidates that we represent. PCR Staffing is a top recruiting agency, providing employers highly qualified and talented candidates to fulfill their staffing needs. We have been in business in the Charlotte NC region since 1995 and have successfully helped over 100 clients nationwide with their talent acquisition needs and over 3000 candidates find their DREAM JOB!,Infovisa, an industry leader in trust and financial accounting software and services, is looking for talented individuals to join our team and assist in the conversion, implementation, and support and testing of our software products and services. We are looking for talented; customer focused individuals to join our team and support our growing client base and expanded product offerings.

Position Summary: This position has three primary roles; conversion of client data from existing trust accounting system to Infovisaâs trust accounting system, day to day support of the jobs and services that are running in our data center (this support includes but is not limited to troubleshooting, monitoring, deployment and configuration of data center services as well as responding to system outages that could occur in the data center) as well as testing of our proprietary software application.

Essential Functions:
Conversion of client data from previous trust system to Infovisaâs proprietary system using customized and standard software applications.
Develop proficiency in products and services built and supported by Infovisa
Effectively explain system functionality and business processes to team members as well as clients
Perform troubleshooting and research of reported issues.
Assist with the testing and release of new product offerings
Monitor and troubleshoot jobs and services that may include delivery of data to a vendor, pricing of securities in the database, upload of database files for our web product, etc.
Responds to requests for database backups and restoration of backups for purposes of research of customer data issues.
Detect and respond to system outages encountered in the data center
Assist with the upgrade of databases and delivery of our most recent release of software.
Prepare user and internal documentation
Conduct training to clients via a variety of methods
Participate in quality assurance testing for all products offered by Infovisa
Assist with disaster recovery testing
May provide on call or after-hours support
Qualifications:
Bachelorâs degree preferred.
Three years professional work experience
Knowledge of Trust Operations, Wealth Management or other investment related experience preferred.
Proficient in Microsoft Office Products
Experience with SQL Server and ability to author and interpret SQL queries.
Ability to work with personal computers and common software applications
Experience mapping, manipulating, interpreting and importing data of various types
Working Environment:

Some travel required.

Indoor work â not exposed to outdoor elements or hazards.

Some sedentary work and occasional lifting and/or carrying up to ten pounds.

Infovisa, an independent provider of data processing systems and related services for bank trust departments, independent trust companies, not-for-profit foundations, colleges, and universities, is looking for talented individuals to join our team and assist in the conversion, implementation and support and testing of our software products and services. We are looking for talented; customer focused individuals to join our team and support our growing client base and expanded product offerings.

Powered by JazzHR,Job Requisition ID #
20WD41504

Position Overview

We’re looking for a talented Data Visualization Analyst to join our Analytics team. This role will serve as a subject matter expert (SME) in Visualization and Business Intelligence development. Focus on this role will be on Data Visualization, Dashboarding & Storytelling, including the development of visual representations of data combining industry-proven best practices with ingenuity to produce compelling data stories that will help our business make rapid data-driven decisions. You will help to reveal a deeper understanding of our performance and opportunities across Autodesk Construction Services (ACS) groups including Product, Sales, Marketing, and Customer Support.

You’ll get to solve highly analytical problems that have a direct and considerable impact on Autodesk Construction Services. You will develop an end-to-end understanding of Data & Analytics, from ETL to Dashboarding to Predictive Modeling. Very few analyst roles have this amount of breadth. The role is highly cross-functional, which means you get to work with Product, Sales, Customer Success, Marketing. You’ll get a deep insight into all of our efforts as we seek to shape the future of the construction industry. Your work will help us design better products, improve user experience, and inform overall business strategy. We use modern data-stack that will allow you to move quickly and learn relevant industry technologies

Responsibilities
Create easy-to-consume dashboards of key metrics; monitor and share insights at a frequent cadence
Visualize data to communicate the performance and impact of various product changes
Design, build and automate reports that provide actionable insight on key metrics
Develop insightful and interactive business intelligence reports (KPIs, operating metrics, business metrics, ad-hoc queries), dashboards, and scorecards in regular cadence
Collaborate with stakeholders to ensure the creation and delivery of the new/enhanced reports/dashboards
Minimum Qualifications
Advanced data visualization skills, show the ability to tell stories and make dashboards actionable
2+ years of relevant experience
Hands-on experience with a cloud-based data-warehousing system (Snowflake)
Strong SQL skills
Strong experience in major BI tools (ie, Looker, Tableau)
Great communication skills with analysts and non-analysts alike
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Preferred Qualifications
BS/MS in Business, Economics, Engineering, Math, Statistics, or equivalent experience
Ability to problem-solve and understand key drivers of the business
Experience in Python/R
Predictive modeling experience
About Autodesk Construction Solutions
Autodesk has fully reimagined the construction business for the digital age, enabling companies to address the most important challenges they face today while preparing for new ways of working in the future. The Autodesk Construction Solutions (ACS) portfolio connects the office, trailer and field so customers can move seamlessly through each phase of a building’s lifecycle - from design and preconstruction to construction, turnover and operations - with best-in-class solutions that include Assemble Systems, BIM 360, BuildingConnected and PlanGrid. General contractors, subcontractors, and owners around the world rely on ACS to win more work, enhance collaboration, speed decision-making, reduce risk, and improve overall project outcomes.

#ACSCareers

#LI-POST

At Autodesk, we're building a diverse workplace and an inclusive culture to give more people the chance to imagine, design, and make a better world. Autodesk is proud to be an equal opportunity employer and considers all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status or any other legally protected characteristic. We also consider for employment all qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with applicable law.

Are you an existing contractor or consultant with Autodesk? Please search for open jobs and apply internally (not on this external site). If you have any questions or require support, contact Autodesk Careers.,Job Requisition ID #
20WD41258
Job Title
Senior Data Analyst
Job Description

Position Overview

Autodesk is seeking an experienced data analyst to join the Data Science team in our Data Platform and Insights group. The Data Platform and Insights group is chartered with building innovative data products and analytics solutions for Autodesk’s strategy, marketing, sales and customer support teams.Data Analysts will play a critical role in discovering and communicating data-driven insights to inspire product improvements.

Responsibilities
Leverage Data Mining techniques to find key business insights
Partner with Data Scientists to improve Data Science models
Collaborate with Product Managers to explore new product ideas or enhancements
Build reporting to measure progress in key initiatives
Become an expert in Autodesk data
Work as an individual contributor with opportunities for management as we grow the team
Minimum Qualifications
2+ years in an Analyst role
Strong SQL coding skills and comfortable using it everyday
Experience working in Python or R
Experience building Data Visualizations via Python/R or a Business Intelligence toolPreferred
Preferred Qualifications
Familiarity with Data Science concepts
Experience working in Git
Experience using big data platforms (Hadoop, Spark, Hive)
A/B Testing ExperienceIdeal Candidate
Are interested in learning about Data Science
Have a strong attention to detail and care deeply about data quality
Proactively reach out to stakeholders to understand data better
Enjoy collaborating with team members to drive impact
Are a strong communicator; you can adjust communication for technical stakeholders and non-technical stakeholders
About Autodesk Construction Solutions
Autodesk has fully reimagined the construction business for the digital age, enabling companies to address the most important challenges they face today while preparing for new ways of working in the future. The Autodesk Construction Solutions (ACS) portfolio connects the office, trailer and field so customers can move seamlessly through each phase of a building’s lifecycle — from design and preconstruction to construction, turnover and operations — with best-in-class solutions that include Assemble Systems, BIM 360, BuildingConnected and PlanGrid. General contractors, subcontractors, and owners around the world rely on ACS to win more work, enhance collaboration, speed decision-making, reduce risk, and improve overall project outcomes.

#ACSCareers

At Autodesk, we're building a diverse workplace and an inclusive culture to give more people the chance to imagine, design, and make a better world. Autodesk is proud to be an equal opportunity employer and considers all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status or any other legally protected characteristic. We also consider for employment all qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with applicable law.

Are you an existing contractor or consultant with Autodesk? Please search for open jobs and apply internally (not on this external site). If you have any questions or require support, contact Autodesk Careers.,At nWay, we're passionate about games and we're always looking for talented individuals who share that same drive. Our studio is located in downtown San Francisco and we're conveniently located near BART and Muni.

Production

Data Analyst

San Francisco, CA

Job Description

The Data Analyst is responsible for providing insights on our players' behavior to both the game development and marketing teams. You will help define what business questions should be asked, build the right analysis with data tools like SQL, and communicate results and recommendations to the team. More importantly, you will develop a deep understanding of our players and our games, our user funnels, and our KPIs to order transform data sets into actionable insights that will improve our business. Your day-to-day responsibilities will stretch across data analysis, dashboard and report building, and metrics review. We're seeking an individual who has both the strategic business vision and the emotional intelligence to infuse and further a data-driven culture into nWay's decision making process.

Responsibilities
Work closely with product management, live ops, system design, user acquisition and other teams to deliver actionable insights into our games in order to improve our acquisition, retention and monetization
Create and update SQL queries and Tableau/Excel/Google Sheet dashboards
Design and implement analytics events and queries to evaluate and optimize features, events and offers
Design, implement, organize and analyze statistical tests (e.g., multivariate tests) to solve specific business problem
Identify and alert team of any problems, anomalies, trends, issues, and opportunities
Answer business questions and provide insights through exploratory data analyses and ad-hoc reporting
Manage data retention management processes, including defining and updating data retention policies and creating/updating tables to optimize data analysis workflow and cost
Qualifications
BS in Analytics, Business Intelligence, Finance, Statistics or Computer Science, or other analytical discipline
3+ years of experience as a data or financial Analyst applying statistical analysis to consumer behaviors (mobile apps, advertising, market activities)
Experience using SQL, including complex queries from multiple data sources
Experience creating, operating and analyzing multiple simultaneous A/B tests
Experience in Python or another scripting language
Strong communication and presentation skills, including extensive use of chart and table tools
Experience with data and BI presentation tools, including Tableau, Excel, and pivot tables
Ability to act on changing priorities and juggle competing projects and deadlines
Understanding of free-to-play game mechanics a strong plus
Why You Want to Work Here

At nWay, we're passionate about games and we're always looking for talented individuals who share that same drive. We're a small startup defined by a very collaborative, lean and laid back culture where everyone just wants to get things done. Our office is located in the heart of San Francisco and we're conveniently located near BART, Muni and Caltrain. We also offer medical, dental, vision, long term disability, and life insurances, FSA/HSA and Commuter options, and a snack room!

Contact us at HR@nway.com

or

APPLY NOW,About Spin

Spin operates electric scooters in cities and campuses nationwide, bringing sustainable last-mile mobility solutions to diverse communities. Recognized for its consistent cooperation and collaboration with cities, Spin partners closely with transportation planners, elected officials, community groups, and university administrators to bring stationless mobility options to streets in a responsible and carefully orchestrated manner.

Based in San Francisco, Spin is a diverse team of engineers, designers, urban planners, policymakers, lawyers and operators with experience from Y Combinator, Lyft, Uber, local and federal government, and the transportation advocacy world. Spin was known for launching the first stationless mobility program in Seattle, and has since expanded to become the exclusive electric scooter partner in mid-sized cities like Coral Gables, Florida and Lexington, Kentucky, and one of a few permitted scooter operators in large cities like Denver, Detroit, and Washington, D.C. The team embeds in cities and neighborhoods to understand their specific transportation needs, and hires locally from the community.

Spin is expanding quickly and looking for top-tier talent to help us bring affordable and accessible transportation options to cities and define what future safe streets will look like.

About the Role:
We are looking for data analysts to work across the organization to generate the data and analysis required to answer some of our toughest questions to help us innovate and grow. You will be solving business problems, identifying data quality issues and performing statistical analysis. You will be working closely with the engineering team to gather new data.

Responsibilities
Set business metrics that measure the health of our business and product
Collaborate with product, engineering, finance, business and operations teams to translate business insights into decisions and actions
Find opportunities for growth and efficiency
Design and analyze experiments
Develop dashboards and frameworks to monitor business and product performance

Qualifications
Degree in a quantitative field like statistics, economics, engineering, or applied math preferred
Minimum of 3 years of relevant experience in data science or analytics role
Proficient in SQL
Experience in R or Python and data science and visualization libraries
Strong oral and written communication skills, and ability to collaborate with cross-functional partners to build the business

Benefits & Perks
Opportunity to join a fast-growing startup and help shape and establish the company's industry leadership
Competitive health benefits
Daily catered lunch in our SF office
Unlimited PTO for salaried roles
Commuter stipend plus pre-tax benefits
Monthly cell phone bill stipend
Wellness perk for salaried roles
Spin is an equal opportunity employer and will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment in an unlawful matter. We celebrate diversity and are committed to creating an inclusive environment for all individuals. Spin treats all employees and job applicants on the basis of merit, qualifications, and competence without regard to any qualified individuals' sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, gender (including pregnancy, breastfeeding, or related medical condition), sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic characteristic or information, marital status, military and veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by state or federal law. Spin also considers qualified applicants with criminal histories, consistent with applicable local, state, and federal law.

Spin is committed to providing reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals with disabilities in its job application procedures. If you need assistance or an accommodation due to a disability, you may contact us at job_accommodations@spin.pm.,Elevate Labs is on a mission to improve people's minds.

The ability to write well and speak eloquently deeply affects your trajectory in life, regardless of profession. Unfortunately, many people leave high school and even college extremely unprepared in these areas. We developed our flagship mobile app, Elevate, to help bridge this gap, through 35 games (and more on the way) that teach concrete cognitive skills. Elevate has over 30 million downloads and has received numerous accolades, including Apple’s App of the Year award.

The Elevate app was just the beginning. We’ve recently launched Balance, a personalized meditation app, that helps people with their stress, sleep, focus, and much more. It’s a truly customized experience that makes meditation more accessible to millions of people.

Join us in creating the future of products that help people live healthy, joyful, and productive lives.

About the Elevate Data Team

We are an iterative, data-driven team with an emphasis on impact. We are also lean and highly technical; always learning interesting new ways to automate our efforts so we don’t have to do the same work repeatedly or take on unnecessary overhead. We are responsible for all analysis, reporting, data quality, A/B test analysis, and our Looker level Persistent Derived Tables and logic. We are called on to do a number of predictive analyses and support other teams in their usage of self-service tools.

About the Role

We are looking for a temporary, all-remote, part-time contractor to join our Data Team as an analyst (20-28 hr/week). There is potential for the role to convert to a full time position in the future.

About You

Inquisitive, curious, and scrappy. Willing to dive into an existing spreadsheet or codebase and figure out how to improve it. Interested in automating manual reporting, exploratory analysis, and documenting what we build.
What you’ll do here
QA our current KPI metrics and dashboards
Create technical documentation for the Data Team and lay person documentation for non-technical stakeholders
Analyze trends over time or specific events related to: user behavior, revenue, ad spend, and other use cases
Create new Persistently Derived Tables (PDT) and Dashboards in Looker for stakeholder teams (using SQL and LookML)
Help implement third party systems for user flow analysis. Once running, analyze how users move through the apps.
What we’re looking for
20-28 hours a week
Ability to communicate clearly with both technical and non-technical stakeholders - Document the underlying logic of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) based on code. Clearly teach/explain to non-technical stakeholders.
Analytical ability - Synthesize and distill large amounts of data or information into bite-sized, understandable insights.
Google Sheets/Excel wizard - Keen eye to QA sheets that already exist and have errors. Can create self-service sheets for non-technical users.
Strong SQL knowledge - CTE’s; CASE WHEN; Multiple levels of aggregation into a final table; Ability to QA SQL code
Motivated to research and figure things out independently.
Bonus Points
Experience with Looker and LookML specifically
Experience with reporting and KPIs at a mobile app company
Analysis experience in R or Python
At Elevate Labs we value diversity and are an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.,Job DescriptionAbout Us:Trifacta, the pioneer in data transformation, significantly enhances the value of an enterprise's Big Data by enabling users to easily transform raw, complex data into clean and structured inputs for analysis. Leveraging decades of innovative work in human-computer interaction, scalable data management, and machine learning, Trifacta's unique Predictive Interaction technology creates a bidirectional partnership between user and machine, with each component learning from the other and becoming smarter through use. Trifacta is backed by venture capital firms Accel, Greylock and Ignition Partners and is headquartered in San Francisco.For more information about the company and its values, see https://www.trifacta.com/about-us/.Responsibilities* Build and deploy standardized metrics and dashboards for the company's leadership team* Assist product and operations to insure that data remain accurate as new processes are applied* Assist in creating a single source of truth for Acquisition, Activation, Retention, Revenue and Referral product usage data* Assist engineering and product to analyze trends in product usage* Work with the product management team to prioritize requirements for business reporting* Use data to create models that depict trends in the customer base and the consumer population as a whole* Work effectively with cross-functional teams* Perform ad-hoc and in-depth analysisRequirements:* 2-5 years experience in business or data analytics* Ability to work independently and as a member of a cross-functional team* Proven ability leveraging analytical and problem-solving skills in a fast-paced environment* Strong communicator, both written and verbal* Bachelor's degree in computer science, data science, finance, or equivalent work experience* SQL and advanced Excel experience required.* Experience in building dashboards and models and proficiency with BI software* Bonus points for experience with regressions and other predictive modelsView All Jobs,At Lyft, our mission is to improve people's lives with the world's best transportation. To do this, we start with our own community by creating an open, inclusive, and diverse organization.

Lyft is hiring a Financial Data Analyst for its FP&A & Accounting teams. This is a crucial role in helping to build and improve upon Lyft's financial foundation. This is a high visibility role that will directly impact a large portion of Lyft's Financial Statements and have a high degree of contact with senior management. The candidate in this position will work closely with Engineering, Finance, and Operations teams to provide visibility of key financial metrics and reports of business initiatives at Lyft.

Responsibilities:
Work to ensure the accuracy of financial data used for financial reporting
Own reporting of key financial data used for reporting and operational decision-making
Perform complex analysis of datasets, build accurate data maps, and conduct regular data validation
Ensure the development of an automated reporting process that covers metrics as well as financial results, and connects the two in an appropriate and accurate manner
Provide general financial data support to other key stakeholders within the Finance team
Work with upstream engineering teams to understand new product requirements and their impact on downstream teams.
Experience:


BA/BS with 2+ years of experience in finance, accounting, business, consulting, or analytics or relevant work experience
Proficiency in SQL with 1+ years of experience working with large data sets
Strong interpersonal and communication skills, with the ability to communicate and influence effectively across various departments
A drive to understand the core issues and determination to uncover the solution
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills
Extremely detail oriented and highly organized
Experience with Github, Terminal, development with various Data Management Systems a plus
Tableau and other data visualization/BI experience a plus
Knowledge / experience with accounting or finance a plus
Experience with Oracle Fusion Products or Netsuite a plus
Experience working with financial planning systems (either Anaplan, Adaptive Insights, or Host Analytics) a plus
Benefits:


Great medical, dental, and vision insurance options
In addition to 11 observed holidays, salaried team members have unlimited paid time off, hourly team members have 15 days paid time off
401(k) plan to help save for your future
18 weeks of paid parental leave. Biological, adoptive, and foster parents are all eligible
Pre-tax commuter benefits
Lyft Pink - Lyft team members get an exclusive opportunity to test new benefits of our Ridership Program
Lyft is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer that proudly pursues and hires a diverse workforce. Lyft does not make hiring or employment decisions on the basis of race, color, religion or religious belief, ethnic or national origin, nationality, sex, gender, gender-identity, sexual orientation, disability, age, military or veteran status, or any other basis protected by applicable local, state, or federal laws or prohibited by Company policy. Lyft also strives for a healthy and safe workplace and strictly prohibits harassment of any kind. Pursuant to the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance and other similar state laws and local ordinances, and its internal policy, Lyft will also consider for employment qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records.,Qualys is seeking a Sales Finance Data Analyst with strong experience in Anaplan (and other financial systems), data management and an interest in helping automate reporting and financial analysis. Responsibilities include establishing and maintaining Master Data standards and items within the Qualys systems and monitoring and validating the integrity of data as well as supporting corrective actions related to variances to standard. He/she will also help maintain systems and manage information used for financial administration and key financial metrics and reporting.

Qualys is the leading provider of Security and Compliance Cloud Software Solutions. The Qualys Cloud Platform and integrated suite of solutions helps businesses simplify security operations and lower the cost of compliance by delivering critical security intelligence on demand and automating the full spectrum of auditing, compliance and protection for IT systems and web applications.

Used by more than 9,300 customers, excluding security consulting firms, in over 100 countries, including a majority of the Forbes Global 100, the Qualys Cloud Platform performs more than 3 billion IP scans/audits a year resulting in over 1 trillion security events.

Minimum Requirements

* 2+ years of hands on experience in building Anaplan models and Anaplan administration supporting multiple business functions and users.

* High proficiency in Microsoft Excel; ability to understand and build automated Excel models from scratch; VBA, SQL and ODBC knowledge preferred

* 2+ years of experience with master data management in an ERP or CRM system; NetSuite and Salesforce preferred.

* Data organization and management skills. Technical expertise with data models, data import methodologies, database design development, and data mining; preferred experience with a BI tool

* Knowledge of Sales Finance (Revenue Forecasting and Reporting) and Sales Operations (Territory/Quota Management) functions preferred

* Bachelors degree in Computer Science or Accounting/Finance/Business or related field preferred

Responsibilities

* Implement, optimize, and maintain Anaplan and augment it with a separate data warehouse as needed

* Build and support complex Planning and Forecasting models using the Anaplan platform.

* Build Anaplan Visualizations

* Help set up and automate reporting and charting and analyze trends and patterns

* Create, maintain, monitor and analyze all master data in ERP & CRM and integrated solutions

* Ensure and enhance data quality and train users to ensure continuity of results

* Provide creative yet logical approaches to solving data problems

* Perform various levels of data validation across multiple systems

* Create and manage the data dictionary to support change management efforts

* Maintain policies and procedures to ensure uniform, accurate, and consistent data are present

* Provide testing support for upgrades and releases, including integration testing from various sources to target systems

* Assist in setting up hierarchies and maintain consistency across different systems

* Assist with data and analysis requests, providing detailed backups and explanations as needed

You are:

* An independent, self-motivated individual who works well under pressure with a positive, service-oriented attitude and a startup mindset of willing to do anything and everything

* Self-starter with a great work ethic and an analytical thinker with superior problem solving and decision making skills and ability to analyze and manipulate data; logical, process-based approach to problem solving with an ability to learn and apply new information

* Extremely detail-oriented and organized with prior experience having gathered, structured, monitored, and validated data to ensure data integrity and detailed documentation; has developed a habit of checking the accuracy of data and analysis several times over before submitting for review

* Excellent multi-tasker who is always on it with stellar time and project management skills; understands the importance of planning in advance to meet deadlines that include multiple review points and iterations

* Team player with strong interpersonal skills capable of working across functions to get buy-in on best practices

* Strong communicator, both written & verbal; reliable and responsive to email and phone communications,Job Description
Focal Systems is a fast-growing Computer Vision AI startup in Silicon Valley. We have doubled in size every year since we were founded 3 years ago.

We are looking for someone to:

• Manage a team of data annotators

• Build tools to ensure high data quality

Requirements:

• Must have studied engineering (BS or MS)

• Must be willing to work 40-60 hours a week

• Must have 3+ years experience in management

• Must be able to present to the Executive Team

Benefits:

We care deeply about the health, happiness, and wellbeing of all of our employees.
Health Insurance
Catered Lunches
Paid Sick Leave
Dental Insurance
Vision Insurance
Quarterly Team Retreat
Powered by JazzHR

57hI3zkfjv,Square builds common business tools in unconventional ways so more people can
start, run, and grow their businesses. When Square started, it was difficult
and expensive (or just plain impossible) for some businesses to take credit
cards. Square made credit card payments possible for all by turning a mobile
phone into a credit card reader. Since then Square has been building an entire
business toolkit of both hardware and software products including Square
Capital, Square Terminal, Square Payroll, and more. We re working to find n
and better ways to help businesses succeed on their own terms and we r
looking for people like you to help shape tomorrow at Square.

Job_Description

As part of the Compliance Product and Strategy Team, you will drive the
analysis for essential decisions and insight across the compliance
organization. You will build and automate reporting for Compliance processes,
improving Compliance infrastructure and platforms.

Cash App is the fastest growing financial brand in the world. Built to take the
pain out of peer-to-peer payments, Cash App has gone from a simple product with
a single purpose to a dynamic money app with over 15 million active monthly
users. Loved by customers and by pop culture, we ve held the #1 spot in
finance on the App Store for almost two years, and our social media posts see
more engagement in a day than most financial brands see in a year. Cash App is
bringing a better way to send, spend, and save to anyone who has ever sought an
alternative to today s banking system.

You_Will
Build and automate metrics reporting for important Compliance processes
Work with engineering teams to understand the intricacies of legacy data
Organize internal Compliance data requests (build transaction monitoring
signals, assure quality and data integrity for internal and external
audits, provide analysis on operational metrics)
Help with ad hoc projects, including leading on project work streams,
which arise from time to time out of regulatory or environmental changes.
Use information from regulatory changes, new regulations, and internal
policy changes to further identify new risk areas
Analyze comparative data, present reports related to AML risk
assessments, and monitor AML related issues and escalations
Build databases, dashboards, and tools on a diverse set of topics with a
focus on promoting automation and scaling, and providing easily
understood reports
Ensure data integrity, identify reporting issues, recommend solutions,
and remove roadblocks
Provide coordination for projects and communicate strategy and priorities
to our teams
Track progress against targets and benchmark performance against main
indicators and stakeholder expectations
Develop approaches/action plans to compliance and control issues by
weighing various alternatives and balancing potentially conflicting
situations
Support ongoing optimization to the effectiveness of all in scope BAU
transaction monitoring systems, scenarios and rules
Identify risks and propose recommendations to address processes requiring
optimization and improvement
Establish and track project milestones while reporting on an overall
integrated delivery plan
Work with cross-divisional partners, including technology, operations and
business personnel through all aspects of strategic builds of critical
compliance program elements
Design key metrics to measure different aspects of the business
You_Have

Qualifications
6+ years experience in an analytics role or equivalent in compliance
space
B.A. or B.S. in quantitative field (i.e. Mathematics, Statistics,
Economics, Computer Science, Engineering Sciences)
Experience with SQL(SnowflakeVertica a plus)
Experience with Transaction Monitoring AML typologies and rules
Experience with Risk Coverage Assessment, Model Validation and Tuning
Experience working with teams across all areas in a company; present
detailed data and recommendations to senior leadership
Knowledge of AML laws and regulations, including a general and broad
understanding of AML and reputational risks (PEPs, Sanctions, AB&C)
Presentation and communications experience extracting insights from
technical data sets to varied audiences including communicating with
senior management

Even_Better
Experience in Looker, Airflow, Python, or Git
Experience with Sanctions screening tools a plus
Consumer Financial Product/Payments/Fintech Experience a plus
Machine learning, statistical modeling or data mining expertise
Additional Information

At Square, we value diversity and always treat all employees and job applicants
based on merit, qualifications, competence, and talent. We do not discriminate
on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual
orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status. We will
consider for employment qualified applicants with criminal histories in a
manner consistent with the requirements of the San Francisco Fair Chance
Ordinance. Applicants in need of special assistance or accommodation during the
interview process or in accessing our website may contact us by sending an
email to assistance(at). We will treat your request as
confidentially as possible. In your email, please include your name and
preferred method of contact, and we will respond as soon as possible.

Perks

At Square, we want you to be well and thrive. Our global benefits package
includes:
Healthcare coverage
Retirement Plans
Employee Stock Purchase Program
Wellness perks
Paid parental leave
Flexible time off
Learning and Development resources,Job Description
Company Description

Square builds common business tools in unconventional ways so more people can start, run, and grow their businesses. When Square started, it was difficult and expensive (or just plain impossible) for some businesses to take credit cards. Square made credit card payments possible for all by turning a mobile phone into a credit card reader. Since then Square has been building an entire business toolkit of both hardware and software products including Square Capital, Square Terminal, Square Payroll, and more. We’re working to find new and better ways to help businesses succeed on their own terms—and we’re looking for people like you to help shape tomorrow at Square.Job Description

You have:
6+ years of experience in an analytics role or equivalent in compliance space
B.A. or B.S. in quantitative field (i.e. Mathematics, Statistics, Economics, Computer Science, Engineering Sciences)
Extensive experience with SQL (SnowflakeVertica a plus) and familiarity with Looker, Airflow, Python, or Git
Experience with financial crimes compliance systems, technologies and processes, especially AML transaction monitoring typologies and rules
Experience leading a team or leading complex projects
Knowledge of AML laws and regulations, including reputational risks (PEPs, Sanctions, AB&C)
Experience working across all business groups in a company
Presentation and communications experience extracting insights, trends and key risks from technical data sets for senior management
Even Better:
Experience or broad understanding of Risk Coverage Assessments, Model Validation and Tuning
Experience with Sanctions screening tools
Consumer Financial Product/Payments/Fintech Experience
Machine learning, statistical modeling or data mining expertise
Qualifications

You will:
Build and automate metrics reporting for Compliance processes
Work with engineering teams to understand the intricacies of legacy data
Organize internal Compliance data requests (build transaction monitoring signals, assure quality and data integrity for internal and external audits, provide analysis on operational metrics)
Help with ad hoc projects, including leading on project work streams, which arise from time to time out of regulatory or environmental changes.
Use information from regulatory changes, new regulations, and internal policy changes to further identify new risk areas
Analyze comparative data, present reports related to AML risk assessments, and monitor AML related issues and escalations
Build databases, dashboards, and tools on a diverse set of topics with a focus on promoting automation and scaling, and providing easily understood reports
Ensure data integrity, identify reporting issues, recommend solutions, and remove roadblocks
Provide coordination for projects and communicate strategy and priorities to our teams
Track progress against targets and benchmark performance against main indicators and stakeholder expectations
Develop approaches/action plans to compliance and control issues by weighing various alternatives and balancing potentially conflicting situations
Support ongoing optimization to the effectiveness of all in scope BAU transaction monitoring systems, scenarios and rules
Identify risks and propose recommendations to address processes requiring optimization and improvement
Establish and track project milestones while reporting on an overall integrated delivery plan
Work with cross-divisional partners, including technology, operations and business personnel through all aspects of strategic builds of critical compliance program elements
Design key metrics to measure different aspects of the business
Additional Information

At Square, we value diversity and always treat all employees and job applicants based on merit, qualifications, competence, and talent. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status. We will consider for employment qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance. Applicants in need of special assistance or accommodation during the interview process or in accessing our website may contact us by sending an email to assistance(at)squareup.com. We will treat your request as confidentially as possible. In your email, please include your name and preferred method of contact, and we will respond as soon as possible.

Perks

At Square, we want you to be well and thrive. Our global benefits package includes:
Healthcare coverage
Retirement Plans
Employee Stock Purchase Program
Wellness perks
Paid parental leave
Flexible time off
Learning and Development resources,The Business Systems Analyst (BSA) will be responsible for working closely with partners from Analytics, Operations, Data Management team and the IT team in order to understand and document strategic drivers and tactical needs to ensure delivery of technology-enabled solutions that add value with the necessary stability, usability, and scalability. The IT Business Systems Analyst will be supporting projects in the Customer Engagement, focusing on Master Data Management (MDM) data solutions.* Facilitate workshops with business stakeholders - story-boarding, user story writing and requirements gathering workshops, digitize story-boarding artifacts and provide input in design sessions* Clearly communicate keeping IT and the customer apprised of status, issues, key metrics* Collaborate with business stakeholders, IT project managers, Architects, Developers & Software Quality Assurance, leading them through the business analysis lifecycle on solution design and development, identifying and managing dependencies and risks* Analyze and document current and future business process models* Analyze and document user stories, requirements, business rules, use cases* Plan user acceptance test (UAT), create UAT scripts and facilitate UAT* Perform knowledge transfer to training and communication teams* Support user deployment activities as neededSkills required:* 7+ years of experience performing business analysis activities across the business analysis life cycle* Experience working on MDM platforms required (Informatica Siperian, Reltio)* Demonstrated success handling initiatives of high complexity and risk* Demonstrated passion for driving your own self-development and motivation* Ability to multitask, work in a fast paced environment and demonstrate the art of agility, flexibility and time management* Strong knowledge of data warehouse modeling and business intelligence concepts;* Advanced experience with data visualization and business intelligence software (ETL, Data Integration, Master Data, Qlikview, SAS),About Hazelcast

Hazelcast provides an in-memory computing platform that empowers Global 2000 enterprises to deliver innovative, low-latency, data-centric applications. Built for ultra-fast processing at an extreme scale, the platform can be deployed on-premise or consumed as a Cloud Service. Our cloud-native in-memory data grid and event stream processing technologies are trusted by leading companies such as J.P. Morgan Chase, Charter Communications, Ellie Mae, UBS, and National Australia Bank to accelerate business-critical applications.

We're far from the typical Silicon Valley start-up story. Even though we're headquartered in San Mateo, CA, our origins trace back to Turkey, where a majority of our engineering team resides. Nowadays, we've become a highly distributed global family of 120+ employees. We are supported by a global cast of VC's across the U.S., U.K., and Europe.

Background to the Role

Hazelcast has an established global finance and sales operations function with experienced leadership based in San Mateo, CA, and support staff and professional advisors based in Turkey and the U.K. to provide local data processing and jurisdiction expertise outside of the U.S.

We are seeking a U.S.-based Sr. Business Data Analyst to complement the existing FP&A skills within the Finance & Sales Ops Function. The position will report to the COO/CFO based in San Mateo. This is a replacement hire to both fit into the existing role and responsibilities, as well as to be part of a broader team whose responsibilities are increasing as the Company is anticipating continued growth.

Overview of the Finance & Sales Ops Function

The Finance & Sales Ops function supports an international business of both direct and channel selling, with employees and channel partners spread across many countries. In addition to internationally located support staff and professional service providers, Hazelcast has deployed a range of Cloud app solutions to ensure the production of accurate and timely sales, operation, and accounting/management information.

The COVID-19 related work-from-home requirements have not impeded the teams' operation. In fact, the past investment in Cloud apps and the Company's distributed work culture is firmly supporting this 'new normal' operational mode. Both the day to day operations, and weekly/monthly reporting cycles of the business, are therefore operating smoothly. We are looking for someone to pick up the ball and help the organization move to the next level of business analysis and insight.

Location is, therefore, not an issue as all responsibilities can be performed remotely, and there will be no firm requirement to visit an office. However, when Shelter-In-Place regulations are lifted, and if office visits are viewed as desirable, the HQ office location is in San Mateo, CA.

What We're Seeking

We are seeking a strong Sr. Business Data Analyst to help us better understand our metrics through rigorous business analysis and insights. Hazelcast's business is both growing in scale as well as expanding its horizons through, for example, new strategic channel partner relationships, products, and services. This role provides a unique opportunity and timing to join a company to analyze new business-critical challenges and opportunities and present data-driven recommendations and insights to the management team. Not only will this role provide exposure to multiple business functions, such as Product Marketing, Cloud Operations, Sales Operations, Marketing, and Financial Planning, but also top executives, including the CEO.

Previous experience(s) in an early-stage software company environment will be important for the candidate, as not everything has yet been built. Data is often messy or incomplete. This role is just as much about doing the difficult work to design the core processes, as it is in getting reliable analytics results. It, therefore, is an opportunity to shape and drive a meaningful impact on the business by helping develop how we approach analytics at the Company.

Are you the type of person who feels they could solve any problem if they just had the right data? Are you someone who can spot the hidden trends in metrics and come up with compelling arguments to explain them? Then this role is for you, responsible for delivering both regular and ad-hoc analysis with actionable insights and translating stakeholders' priorities into dashboards.

Your Impact & Expected Outcomes:
Independently find and deliver analytics insights and forecasts in areas of business operations to drive high stakes business decisions
Develop an understanding for KPIs and analysis of our end-to-end funnel
Own analytics and be the go-to person for data-driven decision making
Facilitate cross-functional partnering in solving business problems and develop strong relationships with the stakeholders
Develop insight and knowledge of trends and factors influencing the business
Present synthesized data-driven analysis and insights to the senior members/ executives
Responsibilities Include:
Understand existing business and financial metrics and seek efficiencies in data gathering techniques and visualization of reporting
Analyze data, and partner with internal team members, to identify opportunities for improvement of metric relevance or expansion of metric breadth
Find improvements in the linkage of performance indicators to evaluate business performance and achievement of team Key Results (from OKRs)
Work with the Finance & Sales Ops team to collaboratively assist in periodic production of budget and forecast financial models
Perform exploratory data analysis to identify trends, patterns, correlations, and insights and provide business recommendations to the leadership team in a simple, clear, and compelling manner
Identify data quality and process improvement opportunities; in particular, finding opportunities to leverage data contained within multiple Systems while ensuring data integrity and consistency across their technological platforms
Identify opportunities for automated monitoring and work with Sales Ops team and ensuring that automated reports and metrics are accurate and delivered in a timely manner
Collaborate with key stakeholders such as Sales, Marketing, Sales Operations, Product/Engineers to build self-service reports and establish automated processes for large scale data analyses as well as ad-hoc reporting
Build, manage, and automate key business metrics into dashboards and scorecards that tell a story
Develop analytics to enable marketing-sales funnel and campaign ROI
Establish benchmarks for growth & expansion across multiple marketing channels, including paid search/social, email marketing, events, web, etc.
Required Skills and Experience:
Bachelor's degree in either Math, Accounting, Finance, Statistics, Business, or a related field. MBA or Masters in Analytics would be a plus
4+ years of experience in an analytics, sales ops, or finance, in a software company
Self-starter, fast learner with a problem-solving attitude, and strong collaborator: there is no job too big or too small if it contributes to the Mission and makes our business better
Ability to distill complex data into easy to understand analysis with actionable conclusions and recommendations
Strong data mining skills, extended Excel skills, experience with data visualization tools, and use of PPT and GSuite apps. Experience of Adaptive Insights a plus
Experience in gathering requirements and formulating business metrics for reporting
Understanding of data modeling concepts
Extremely detail-oriented and organized; highly quantitative and creative, passionate about using data to guide strategy
Ability to communicate data, at a level appropriate for the audience
Thrive in a fast-paced start-up environment!
The ideal candidate will bring a strong business mindset for approaching problems in a quantitative way and will have the technical skills for data extraction and manipulation. This is the perfect opportunity for someone with 4+ years of experience to gain rapid professional and personal development, gain executive exposure, and drive decisions at a high-growth company. High-level prioritization of effort and time will be guided by the COO/CFO. Still, within that, the individual will be expected to be a self-starter and manage their time accordingly.

Compensation & Benefits:
Friendly, team-oriented, diverse international culture
Remote/flexible working
Awesome equipment of choice!
Competitive market salary
Medical, Dental, and Vision Insurance
Stock option plan participation,Title: EPIC Clarity Data Analyst
Location: 747 52nd Street, Oakland, CA 94609
Duration: Long Term (On-Going) (20-25 Hours a week)
JOB DESCRIPTION / SUMMARY:
The Data Analyst position assists with the management of data within the Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC. Under the supervision of the Department Director and according to established policies, procedures and regulatory requirements, the position is accountable for aspects of data management, including: documentation and tracking of data, graphical display, reporting, and integrity of data and reports.
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
· Perform quantitative and qualitative analysis of data in order to produce business intelligence reports, performance charts, graphs and other reports, and develop and present healthcare data analytical solutions.
· Extract, update, and interpret medical data from a variety of databases/sources and transform it into intelligent, actionable reports.
· Analyzes and reports data related to various operational metrics in order to make recommendations for operational process improvements to senior management and other department heads.
· Assist in contract rate modeling by comparatively analyzing volume, case mix, industry benchmarks, ROI and optimizations.
· Perform monthly and quarterly reconciliations. Perform data queries and informational updates.
· Report development by merging data and other data mining tools, on a routine or ad-hoc basis, using Crystal reporting and working with EPIC
· Monitor and develop dashboards to support monitoring of performance in key business areas including clinical, care coordination, payer contracting, and claims data.
· Develop and maintain key financial and operational reporting metrics
REQUIREMENTS:
Communications: Excellent written and oral communication and interpersonal skills with internal and external customers/stakeholders supporting ability to effectively relate, inform, instruct and facilitate the understanding and use of generated data. Participate in proactive team efforts to achieve goals.
Decision-Making: Strong ability to work independently. Must be able to prioritize tasks, handle multiple tasks and projects simultaneously, and be organized.
Problem-Solving: Strong experience in utilizing database tools for analytical, building and maintaining metrics/data models, utilization decision support tools in healthcare environment (FQHC preferred). Creating reporting metrics, developing and publishing dashboards, scorecards and reports must be able to define problems, collect data, establish facts and draw valid conclusions.
Financial Responsibilities: Develop and maintain key financial and operational reporting metrics
· Minimum 1-2 years experience in healthcare data management and/or, preferably in an FQHC setting.
· Bachelor degree in quantitative/analytically challenging field (Finance, statistics, etc)
· Proficiency in use of Microsoft Word, Excel, and PowerPoint. Familiarity with Access preferred.
· Experience in data analysis and decision support including proficiency with analytical software.
· Requires knowledge of basic analytical principles and concepts. Knowledge of statistical analysis, data display and benchmarking preferred
· Professional demeanor, highly flexible, able to manage multiple and changing priorities, and meet aggressive project deadlines.
· Ability to work with members of multiple disciplines to identify sources of data, collection methodologies and improvement opportunities
· Knowledge of medical terminology preferred
Best,
Kushal Shah
APN Software Service INC
kushal@apninc.com,Description


Qualys is seeking a Sales Finance Data Analyst with strong experience in Anaplan (and other financial systems), data management and an interest in helping automate reporting and financial analysis. Responsibilities include establishing and maintaining Master Data standards and items within the Qualys systems and monitoring and validating the integrity of data as well as supporting corrective actions related to variances to standard. He/she will also help maintain systems and manage information used for financial administration and key financial metrics and reporting.

Qualys is the leading provider of Security and Compliance Cloud Software Solutions. The Qualys Cloud Platform and integrated suite of solutions helps businesses simplify security operations and lower the cost of compliance by delivering critical security intelligence on demand and automating the full spectrum of auditing, compliance and protection for IT systems and web applications.

Used by more than 9,300 customers, excluding security consulting firms, in over 100 countries, including a majority of the Forbes Global 100, the Qualys Cloud Platform performs more than 3 billion IP scans/audits a year resulting in over 1 trillion security events.

Minimum Requirements

* 2+ years of hands on experience in building Anaplan models and Anaplan administration supporting multiple business functions and users.

* High proficiency in Microsoft Excel; ability to understand and build automated Excel models from scratch; VBA, SQL and ODBC knowledge preferred

* 2+ years of experience with master data management in an ERP or CRM system; NetSuite and Salesforce preferred.

* Data organization and management skills. Technical expertise with data models, data import methodologies, database design development, and data mining; preferred experience with a BI tool

* Knowledge of Sales Finance (Revenue Forecasting and Reporting) and Sales Operations (Territory/Quota Management) functions preferred

* Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science or Accounting/Finance/Business or related field preferred

Responsibilities

* Implement, optimize, and maintain Anaplan and augment it with a separate data warehouse as needed

* Build and support complex Planning and Forecasting models using the Anaplan platform.

* Build Anaplan Visualizations

* Help set up and automate reporting and charting and analyze trends and patterns

* Create, maintain, monitor and analyze all master data in ERP & CRM and integrated solutions

* Ensure and enhance data quality and train users to ensure continuity of results

* Provide creative yet logical approaches to solving data problems

* Perform various levels of data validation across multiple systems

* Create and manage the data dictionary to support change management efforts

* Maintain policies and procedures to ensure uniform, accurate, and consistent data are present

* Provide testing support for upgrades and releases, including integration testing from various sources to target systems

* Assist in setting up hierarchies and maintain consistency across different systems

* Assist with data and analysis requests, providing detailed backups and explanations as needed

You are:

* An independent, self-motivated individual who works well under pressure with a positive, service-oriented attitude and a startup mindset of willing to do anything and everything

* Self-starter with a great work ethic and an analytical thinker with superior problem solving and decision making skills and ability to analyze and manipulate data; logical, process-based approach to problem solving with an ability to learn and apply new information

* Extremely detail-oriented and organized with prior experience having gathered, structured, monitored, and validated data to ensure data integrity and detailed documentation; has developed a habit of checking the accuracy of data and analysis several times over before submitting for review

* Excellent multi-tasker who is always “on it” with stellar time and project management skills; understands the importance of planning in advance to meet deadlines that include multiple review points and iterations

* Team player with strong interpersonal skills capable of working across functions to get buy-in on best practices

* Strong communicator, both written & verbal; reliable and responsive to email and phone communications

EEO Employer/Vet/Disabled,Job Description
Below are the Job Details
Title: Data Analyst-IT II
Duration: 6+ months
Location: Redwood City, CA 94065

General Info: Performs analysis of user access data, formats and organizes data for access reviews. Follows up with individuals to ensure assigned work is completed by deadlines. Requires a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and 3-6 years of experience in the field or in a related area. Relies on limited experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals. Performs a variety of tasks. Works under general supervision. A certain degree of creativity and latitude is required. Typically reports to a supervisor or manager

Specific Job Details:
A key component of Security for our internal systems is ensuring user access levels are appropriate. Our Access review program is performed quarterly and takes all 12 weeks to complete. This role will be asked to take direction from the Access Review Program Manager who will detail the work that needs to be done each quarter. Being detailed oriented is critical for this role as there will be a lot of data sources and all work will need to be tracked and stored as evidence for internal and external auditors.
This role will help facilitate reviews of user access across dozens of systems. Specifically, the tasks include:
• Creating Service Requests to track each review
• Compiling user entitlement data from in scope environments and from Oracle's Identity Management system
• Formatting data extracted from systems to ensure easy review and analysis
• Create and initiate survey to be completed by designated reviewers.
• Follow up on completion of surveys until 100%, and ensure deadlines are met.
Work with Oracle's Identity Management team to use OIM functionality to certify user entitlements.
• Confirm identified reviewers by asking management to review list of reviewers.
• Compile user entitlement data, ensuring audit evidence is captured effectively
• Submit Service Request to OIM team detailing requirements for certification creation,The SharePoint Online (SPO) Service Reliability Engineering (SRE) team delivers SharePoint services to customers globally. Most customers are Fortune 500 companies and nearly all are recognizable household names. Today we are the top hosted service providers in the world with millions of seats sold and active on our platform.The SPO team is looking for an experienced Data Analyst. You'll be joining a team of passionate professionals focused on service reliability, incident response and shape how we think about service disrupting events and the associated reporting and analytics to support all aspects of our business. You'll help us build and curates an end to end data pipeline and reporting suite, deep data analysis as well as advanced data science. You'll develop insights that are used in scenarios spanning increasing service reliability, early degradation detection, customer satisfaction, defining and tracking key business metrics and informing the future roadmap for the business. We are a highly collaborative team that works in close collaboration with our stakeholders and engineering partners.Degree in Statistics/Math/Computer Science/Economics/Business or EngineeringAdvanced working knowledge of large data manipulation and data mining using SQL or similar toolsAdvanced knowledge of OLAP/MOLAP technologies and MDXAdvanced Excel and PowerPoint skills, as well as visualization toolsExceptional problem solving, technical and data analysis skillsGreat written and verbal communication and presentation skillsBe self-driven, and show ability to deliver on ambiguous projects with incomplete or dirty dataAbility to work in a team environment that promotes collaborationExperience with Data Lake infrastructures (Cosmos, Hadoop or similar)Candidates must pass the Microsoft Cloud background check upon hire/transfer and every two years thereafterMicrosoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form.Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work.Responsibilities woulPartner with teams across SRE, engineering, business stakeholders and field organizations to provide key business insightsPartnering deeply with program managers and engineers to bring data to their business decision makingWork with these stakeholders to define clear signals of success, which translate into simple, easily understood metrics that drive our processes and businessWork with Data Science and Data Engineering resources to develop requirements for data, reporting, views, tools etc.Lead deep dives and analyses into metric performance and special projectsDefine and build data models to meet business requirementsBuild Business Intelligence applications to surface and report data and insightsBuild expertise in our telemetry signals, investigate data quality and implementation issues, ensure successful rollout of signals and ongoing telemetry healthPrepare specifications, documentation, reports and presentation materials,bility to translate a business problem into direction for how to explore/find relevant data
Ability to deeply understand the business process and programs and translate that into getting the right data to meet the objective
Exposure on working with significant chunks of time on interpreting data and coming up with requirements
Ability to identify and finalize the business requirements in an agile fashion and provide deliverables in phases
Experience dealing with data integrity issues and providing deliverables in short period of time along with possible data enhancements suggestions
Experience working through very ambiguous requirements to create dashboards
Experience defining KPIs & metrics that are aligned to business problems
Should have done analysis on large scale data
Hands on SQL to write complex queries as a part of data analysis in Snowflake
Proficient in Excel advanced functions such as Pivot tables, power pivots, power query
Experience in data visualization tools- Tableau/ Qlikview
Other Enterprise applications- Salesforce, FinancialForce
Ability to identify problems, business context to do the analysis
Ability to deal with high ambiguity and business complexity
Experience in providing multiple solutions to client due to rapidly changing strategic priorities
Ability to find and communicate insights based on data exploration
Expertise in identifying the undefined problems business trying to solve
Attention to detail and focus on data quality
Demonstrated ability to communicate complex analysis to leadership
Experience in Story boarding using power point, word.. etc. out of ad-hoc
Able to story tell and stitch through multiple analysis to convey an overall analysis
Ability to create concise and impactful PowerPoint decks,Microsoft Digital Sales - Demand Response (DR) and Customer Success (CSM) BI and Data AnalystAre you an experienced business professional who wants to enable our regional center to execute against customer priorities and drive successful customer cloud adoption and expansion? If so, then Microsoft's Digital Sales Team is looking for you!THE OPPORTUNITYMicrosoft is empowering every person and every organization on the planet to do more and achieve more. We have set three bold ambitions for ourselves: create more personal computing, reinvent productivity and business processes, and build the intelligent cloud. Our culture is centered on embracing a growth mindset, a theme of inspiring excellence and encouraging teams and leaders to bring their best each day. We were recently recognized as a most attractive global employer and have been and continue to be known for our exceptional citizenship and community efforts. We have offices and career opportunities in all 50 U.S. states and 250+ countries around the world.Be a part of a multi-generational, diverse and customer-obsessed team that demands excellence. Develop and apply your skills alongside the leading technology, marketing and sales experts in a dynamic, fast-paced environment. And most importantly, achieve your personal goals and advance your career whether you are looking to build on your sales and consulting experience or exploring how to leverage your experience to help drive a sizeable cloud business.JOB DESCRIPTIONThis role focuses on supporting the Regional Center's Sales and Business Operational reporting, processes, and tools which affect those operations within the DR and CSM organizations. The successful candidate will gain a deep understanding of both operating models, drive seamless collaboration within the Sales Centers and Regional Leadership teams, and partner closely as well with Finance and AgileBI stakeholders, while being a key member of the Sales Excellence team which supports the dynamic, fast-paced and quickly evolving sales organization. This position is a strategic contributor operationalizing strategy, driving growth, increasing seller productivity and driving cultural transformation.This role will partner with the Global Sales Excellence Lead for DR and CSM, the DR and CSM Finance Controller, AgileBI team, and M&O stakeholders all involved to support DR and CSM. The successful candidate will also interface the DR and CSM Global Leadership team. This position will be filled in Fargo, ND, or Redmond, WA.Experiences Required: Education, Key Experiences, Skills and Knowledge:* Core Competencies: Stakeholder Management, Strong Business Acumen and Data Analytical skills, Strategic Insights, Trusted Advisor, Strategic Sales Planning, Sales Team Leadership* Professional Competencies: Adaptability, Drive for Results, Judgement, Collaboration, Executive Maturity/Presence, Value Selling, Analytical Problem Solving, Organized & Disciplined, Initiates/Embraces Change.* Experience:* 5+ years of related experience with data analytics and the ability to review successfully data and reports to extract meaningful insights that drive strategies and executive decision making processes.* Knowledge of data structuring, PowerBI (intermediate level proficiency required), Knowledgeable in SQL (at least 2-3 years of regular use for business analysis and query)* Able to communicate effectively with both engineering (Agile BI, CSEO) and business partners (Finance, Sales Excellence, Strategy team, Sales Leaders, Incentive Compensation team)* Will be responsible for writing detailed data requirements* Strong Excel skills required* Education: Bachelor preferred, MBA/Masters a plus with focus on economics, marketing, finance, organizational management, business managementMicrosoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form.Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work.RESPONSIBILITIES* Coordinates Operational, Finance and Executive reporting data needs, current and requested across ISDR and CSM stakeholders: Deliver specific, highly technical data requirements to Agile BI, CSEO, M&O BI team, others as needed* Data Strategy: Rationalizes business reporting asks across Sales Excellence, Sales Leadership, GDC and Agile BI teams. Understands related systems and data across technical groups* Streamlines data flow across Compensation and Reporting tools/databases to maximize efficiency and having a single source of truth* Business Engagement: working across the business with all key leaders to ensure data is available for required views/reports/ad-hoc requests* Ensures support: Documents asks, triages business escalations, owns prioritization and business relates status reporting, UAT and adoption efforts* Support integration of Targets into the reporting tools* Help test data related to strategic business changes such as move to ACR* Roadmap planning: Define future state plan based on business and engineering priorities through alignment with business partners.* Drives growth planning initiatives by identifying levers and metrics that will best track and accelerate progress toward goal achievement* Provide business requirements to AgileBI, and WWM&O to develop automated reporting,Are you passionate about solving problems and working with customers? Do you want to help make enterprises more secure as the move to the Azure cloud?Join the Security Health and Analytics team as a security data analyst and help us bring customer and business insights to our security monitoring and baseline data.In this role, you will analyze and action various security monitoring logs and configuration settings for cloud services for the Azure Platform and also enabling security analytics for our Azure customers via Azure Security Center. You will have the opportunity to work with internal and external customers, looking for opportunities to harden their configuration and work with the program managers and engineers to implement security monitoring changes to improve the security monitoring and configuration of our services.Microsoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form.Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work.Required Qualifications:* 2+ years experience hand on analytics experience with proven quantitative orientation* 1+ years experience working knowledge of large data manipulation and data mining using SQL* Excellent Technical writing and excellent written and verbal communication skills* Knowledge of Cloud services* Ability to work in a team environment that promotes collaboration* This position requires verification of US Citizenship to meet Federal Government Contract Security requirements.* Candidates must have an active Top Secret clearance and be willing to upgrade to TS/SCI with Full Scope Polygraph or have an active TS/SCI and be willing to upgrade to TS/SCI with FSP . This role will require candidates to maintain the TS/SCI (with polygraph) clearance.* This position will be required to pass the Microsoft Cloud background check upon hire/transfer and every two years thereafter.Preferred Qualifications:* Bachelor's degree a related discipline such as Computer Science or Computer Information Systems highly preferred* Passion for evaluating detailed settings in Windows and Linux and how those settings inter-operate* Be self-driven, and show ability to deliver on ambiguous projects with incomplete or dirty data preferred* Knowledge of security monitoring preferred#AzureSecCSS#AzureSecOpenAbility to meet Microsoft, customer and/or government security screening requirements are required for this role. These requirements include but are not limited to the following specialized security screenings: Microsoft Cloud Background Check: This position will be required to pass the Microsoft Cloud background check upon hire/transfer and every two years thereafter.* Analyze network security groups, firewalls, operating system settings, Azure Policy insights, and other dimensional data to identify insecure configurations and defense in depth improvements* Understand common network environments to customize network baseline settings* Providing actionable intelligence and analytics that will make our products and services better and grow our business* Prototype environment specific security monitoring detections* Be able to tell a story from the security monitoring data through enriching with other data sets and dimensional data* Provide trend analysis, variance analysis, findings, and insights and then then work with stakeholders to articulate what actions are needed or being taken on each scenario to drive or improve our security baseline service profiles* Become a subject matter expert in the C+AI services, the security monitoring space, and the business and underlying data ecosystem for security monitoring, including working with compliance and security assurance.* Collaborate with product and program owners across the organization to understand objectives, identify opportunities, and prioritize projects to maximize business impact.* Ensure the ongoing documentation of analysis methodologies and results.* To be successful in this role, you must have knowledge of securing cloud services and strong skills in written and oral communications, a can-do attitude and the willingness to tackle hard problems in innovative ways. You must also thrive in a team environment that values cross team collaboration and building on the success of others,Title: Data Analyst/PM (German)
Location: Redmond, WA

Job Description:
• Basic knowledge of SQL would be good.
• Some coding experience would be good.
• Knowledge of HTML would be good.
• Ability to clearly communicate in English is needed.
• PM abilities, so able to work and prioritize work independently, so experience is needed and the ability to present them self confidently would help them pass inspection.

Position 1:
Job Description
• WPSBS measurement submissions on en-US and international markets
• Feature score V2 (problem classification)
• Work on improving rules of a rule-based model
• Work on UHRS for judge quality
• Help on TCX Core task review on en-GB
• Help on TCX task parameter preparation on en-GB
Requirement
• Strong project management
• Senior enough to be able to independently execute on a plan(work, and technical enough to work along with Devs
• Good knowledge on SQL, BingDAT, UHRS
• Have coding skills that can modify the model rules in the code
• Native speaker for de-DE (German),Are you someone with a passion for data, analytics, insights and technology? Do you want to be part of a team lighting up actionable insights to help the organization make business decisions? If you excel in blending quantitative analysis with strategy development and want to influence the future of Core Services at Microsoft, then this position is for you.The Data team in Shared Services (part of Core Services Engineering) is looking for a passionate, creative, analytical data analyst who loves big data, curious to explore and unveil insights to create a business story and reporting to impact key business decisions. Our team plays a key role in providing data and analytics within Core Services Engineering and owns the end to end decision sciences charter that includes:* bringing the relevant data together to deliver high value business scenarios* creating key metrics, reports and dashboards to support business health* building advanced analytical models (behavior segmentation, churn prediction, recommendation engine, etc.) that spans over sales, marketing, supply chain, finance, HR and engineering areas.This position is for a Data Analyst within Core Services Engineering, a role driving insights about the internal services that we provide the company, the health of our engineering systems / business processes and the impact they make. The scope includes understanding and monitoring key metrics and ongoing analysis to inform overall strategy for enabling the company to accelerate its digital transformation.You are driven, self-directed, entrepreneurial and focused on delivering the right results. To be successful in this role, you must have strong skills in written and oral communications, a can-do attitude and the willingness to tackle hard problems in innovative ways.Required - • 5+ years hands on analytics experience with proven quantitative orientation* Bachelor or Master's Degree in Statistics/Math/Computer Science/Economics/Business or Engineering* Exceptional problem solving, technical and data analysis skills* Advanced working knowledge of large data manipulation and data mining* Strong programming knowledge (proficient in SQL)* Advanced dashboard design & development (e.g. PowerBI), and visualization skills* Advanced Excel and PowerPoint skills* Exceptional written and verbal communication and presentation skills* Be self-driven, and show ability to deliver on ambiguous projects with incomplete or dirty data* Ability to work in a team environment that promotes collaboration and succeed in a matrix structure by influencing new thinkingPreferred - • Experience with big data technologies such as Azure Data Lake, HD Insight, Spark, Hive, etc.* Business domain expertise in areas of product development, sales, marketing, supply chain, finance and/or HRMicrosoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form.Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work.Driving insights about the internal services that we provide the company, the health of our engineering systems / business processes and the impact they make. The scope includes understanding and monitoring key metrics and ongoing analysis to inform overall strategy for enabling the company to accelerate its digital transformation.,Are you passionate about solving problems and working with customers? Do you want to help make enterprises more secure as the move to the Azure cloud? Join the Security Health and Analytics team as a security data analyst and help us bring customer and business insights to our security monitoring and baseline data. In this role, you will analyze and action various security monitoring logs and configuration settings for cloud services for the Azure Platform and also enabling security analytics for our Azure customers via Azure Security Center. You will have the opportunity to work with internal and external customers, looking for opportunities to harden their configuration and work with the program managers and engineers to implement security monitoring changes to improve the security monitoring and configuration of our services. Responsibilities * Analyze network security groups, firewalls, operating system settings, Azure Policy insights, and other dimensional data to identify insecure configurations and defense in depth improvements * Understand common network environments to customize network baseline settings * Providing actionable intelligence and analytics that will make our products and services better and grow our business * Prototype environment specific security monitoring detections * Be able to tell a story from the security monitoring data through enriching with other data sets and dimensional data * Provide trend analysis, variance analysis, findings, and insights and then then work with stakeholders to articulate what actions are needed or being taken on each scenario to drive or improve our security baseline service profiles * Become a subject matter expert in the C+AI services, the security monitoring space, and the business and underlying data ecosystem for security monitoring, including working with compliance and security assurance. * Collaborate with product and program owners across the organization to understand objectives, identify opportunities, and prioritize projects to maximize business impact. * Ensure the ongoing documentation of analysis methodologies and results. * To be successful in this role, you must have knowledge of securing cloud services and strong skills in written and oral communications, a can-do attitude and the willingness to tackle hard problems in innovative ways. You must also thrive in a team environment that values cross team collaboration and building on the success of others Qualifications Microsoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form . Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work. Required Qualifications: * 2 + years experience hand on analytics experience with proven quantitative orientation * 1+ years experience working knowledge of large data manipulation and data mining using SQL * Excellent Technical writing and excellent written and verbal communication skills * Knowledge of Cloud services * Ability to work in a team environment that promotes collaboration * This position requires verification of US Citizenship to meet Federal Government Contract Security requirements. * Candidates must have an active Top Secret clearance and be willing to upgrade to TS/SCI with Full Scope Polygraph or have an active TS/SCI and be willing to upgrade to TS/SCI with FSP . This role will require candidates to maintain the TS/SCI (with polygraph) clearance. * This position will be required to pass the Microsoft Cloud background check upon hire/transfer and every two years thereafter. Preferred Qualifications: * Bachelor's degree a related discipline such as Computer Science or Computer Information Systems highly preferred * Passion for evaluating detailed settings in Windows and Linux and how those settings inter-operate * Be self-driven, and show ability to deliver on ambiguous projects with incomplete or dirty data preferred * Knowledge of security monitoring preferred #AzureSecCSS #AzureSecOpen Ability to meet Microsoft, customer and/or government security screening requirements are required for this role. These requirements include but are not limited to the following specialized security screenings: Microsoft Cloud Background Check: This position will be required to pass the Microsoft Cloud background check upon hire/transfer and every two years thereafter.,Focal Systems is a fast-growing Computer Vision AI startup in Silicon Valley. We have doubled in size every year since we were founded 3 years ago.

We are looking for someone to:

â¢ Manage a team of data annotators

â¢ Build tools to ensure high data quality

Requirements:

â¢ Must have studied engineering (BS or MS)

â¢ Must be willing to work 40-60 hours a week

â¢ Must have 3+ years experience in management

â¢ Must be able to present to the Executive Team

Benefits:

We care deeply about the health, happiness, and wellbeing of all of our employees.
Health Insurance
Catered Lunches
Paid Sick Leave
Dental Insurance
Vision Insurance
Quarterly Team Retreat
Powered by JazzHR,Job Requisition ID #
20WD40934

Position Overview
As the Sales Insights Analyst, Americas your mission is to partner with the Inside Sales organization to enable the achievement of sales targets selling into Autodesk territory customers. Inside Sales Operations contributes to sales success through process optimization, best practice sharing, and delivering key business insights for decision making. We have the end to end business knowledge to link cross functional teams and build scalable solutions that fuel sales productivity and growth.

Your job is to put your strong analytical skills to work drawing conclusions and making recommendations to the Denver based Americas Inside Sales Director and sales leadership team. You must be a curious, passionate, energetic and self-motivated sales analyst with the ability to support multiple inside sales roles and teams to drive growth. You will primarily use pipeline, billings, and activity data to analyze and recommend business strategies and corresponding tactics.

Reporting directly to the Global Sales Analytics & Insights Manager, you will have an opportunity to directly influence the direction of sales productivity strategy while creating an operationally excellent sales organization. You must be intellectually curious, detail-oriented, and able to identify solutions to complex problems then roll-up your sleeves to drive implementation and track your work’s impact.

If you’re excited about the opportunity to effect revenue growth through creating compelling recommendations to drive better sales performance based on using data and analytics- we’d love to hear from you!

Global Sales Insights and Analytics @ Autodesk
You will join Global Sales and Success Operations (GSSO) which is part of Autodesk’s 2000+ person Worldwide Sales and Services organization. Operations is the crew that plans, builds and runs the sales engine that helps sales reps and partners drive business. We are all about improving sales productivity and performance. We define sales processes, build sales talent, recognize and reward high performance, design and build sales systems, and more. Our work environment is fast-paced and always evolving. In GSO, we value professional development, strategic thinking and innovation. We are fearless in taking on new challenges that will deliver awesome results.

Responsibilities
Work directly with Sales Leaders to achieve sales goals by providing timely sales analytics and insights including pipeline analysis, activity, and sales results
Develop, generate, and present key performance indicators (KPIs) and key analysis for sales leadership on a weekly, quarterly, and annual basis including specific sales coverage and performance analytics
Pro-actively identify issues and solutions to make business and performance data flow better for the sales teams
Proactively assess and execute opportunities to improve data usage
Work on problems of moderate to complex scope where analysis of situations or data requires a review of a variety of factors (often with incomplete information)
Work closely with the Sales Insights Analysts for EMEA and APAC to share knowledge, best practices and facilitate standardization across the global sales organization
Track and report on assigned account performance - measurement set by business units, sales, and marketing attribution
Contribute to planning and implementation projects for account and territory selection to optimize the sales team for next year planning
Build and maintain relationships with cross-functional partners such as sales, marketing, finance, compensation, and data engineering
Support ad-hoc reporting and analytics request with an eye for creating scalable self-service or automated solutions
Minimum Qualifications
3-5 years’ experience in Sales Analytics, Sales Operations, Business Operations or a related field, in a complex and fast-paced environment
Demonstrated success in the analysis, design and implementation of reports and dashboards
Strong analytical, quantitative, and problem-solving abilities
Comfort with providing data driven guidance and recommendations
English Language- Native level proficiency â€“ spoken and written
Excellent communication and storytelling skills: must be able to covey a compelling argument using data and analytics
Proficient with Business Intelligence Tools (BI) and Analysis tools: Einstein, Power BI, Tableau, etc. is a plus
Experience with SFDC reporting and dashboards is ideal
CRM experience is a must
Intellectual curiosity and a ‘can do’ attitude
Excellent communication skills
Impeccable organization skills and attention to detail
Fast learner with a strong belief in continuous learning
Comfortable working with a remote, global team of peers
You are currently located in Denver Metro Area
Preferred Qualifications
You are passionate about efficiency and productivity- You want to help others perform better.
You look for ways to make smart use of new technologies or innovative approaches to providing business insights
You get stuff done - smart and fast
You like to take initiative
You enjoy working with a diverse group of opinionated people to pursue a common goal- You listen extremely well to uncover business requirements that will help drive better decision making
You work fast, making sure that your key stakeholders are with you all the way
You aren’t afraid to challenge the way things are done- You have a knack for looking at things from new or different perspectives
You are willing to challenge how things are done and take the best of the past to build something new for the future
You work well with others You know the nuances of when to let others speak, and when/how to insert yourself ‘without ego’, always staying focused on identifying and solving the business problems at hand
As an effective communicator, you understand that influencing requires winning both hearts and minds
You also have experience working at all levels of the company, including senior managers and VPs
You know how to tap into your network, be consultative, and marshal resources to accomplish goals

At Autodesk, we're building a diverse workplace and an inclusive culture to give more people the chance to imagine, design, and make a better world. Autodesk is proud to be an equal opportunity employer and considers all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status or any other legally protected characteristic. We also consider for employment all qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with applicable law.

Are you an existing contractor or consultant with Autodesk? Please search for open jobs and apply internally (not on this external site). If you have any questions or require support, contact Autodesk Careers.,Position Type: Permanent

Compensation: Commensurate w/experience

Location: Denver, CO

We are looking for a passionate Data Analyst who will be primarily responsible for thinking critically about our game data, investigating and querying issues, and communicating thorough reports of findings and implications.

This position is located at our Denver studio. Must be willing to relocate.

Responsibilities
Monitor game data and identify problem areas.
Guide data requests from translation to query, and query to analysis.
Validate that systems and reports are performing to spec.
Work with customers to identify improvements and potential iterations.
Develop positive relationships with a variety of internal and external customers.
Comprehend and troubleshoot complex and nuanced data questions.
Desired Skills & Experience

Qualifications
Bachelor degree or equivalent analytical experience.
Strong communication skills and ability to collaborate cross-functionally.
Self-starter mentality with a deep interest in understanding complex groups of players.
Highly experienced with SQL.
A passion for data and analysis.
Pluses
Experience with game data.
Experience and passion for TCGs.
Conversant in scripting languages (e.g., Python).
Background in high level mathematics and/or statistics.
Technical experience with data design and management.
Experience with big data and/or Redshift.
To apply, send an email with your cover letter and resume attached to: info@direwolfdigital.com,Job Description
The Role
Come help our customers learn more about the world. Below is a small sample of the questions we’ve asked of our data over the last year.
Did Lyft’s prospects improve in politically progressive areas in the aftermath of Uber’s press woes?
Is Amazon’s revenue growth in the fourth quarter primarily driven by customers in rural areas?
How did the path of the solar eclipse affect hotel bookings across the United States?

As part of the client-focused function on the data team, you will be responsible for helping industry-leading companies understand how purchase and travel behavior is changing in America. You will become an expert in our dataset and answers questions from prospects, customers, and internal stakeholders to help extract value from our data.

You
You creatively work through problems with statistically sound thinking and have the natural itch to follow obstacles to their root cause. You think deeply about the problems ahead and are comfortable moving between tools in your toolbelt. And you are quick to learn, implementing new approaches when facing questions that demand it. You are a stickler for quality and pay careful attention to the details that matter.

You are a gifted communicator and are passionate about helping others make sense of data. You are comfortable juggling multiple projects at one time and relish the opportunity to empower leaders in finance, technology, and consumer goods with data to shape their long term strategy.

Requirements
1+ years of SQL experience
Ability to communicate findings to non-experts
Desire to learn data modeling technologies (python, spark) and build on statistical knowledge
Bachelors in social science (Economics, Sociology, ...), related discipline or equivalent experience
Excited by a high learning curve
Excellent written and oral communicator

Compensation and Benefits
Highly competitive salary and benefits
Stock grants pre-IPO at a company backed by top investors
Take unlimited, responsible vacation

About Us
Edison provides intelligent email solutions for users and competitive intelligence for businesses. The largest, most valuable and as yet untapped data on earth is in mail; 3x larger than the worldwide web. Through our user base of more than 3 million users, we empower investors, brands, and technology companies to understand trends in the marketplace and gain deep insights into consumer behavior patterns.

As a team, we’re collaborative, engaged, and committed to continually improving as we serve our mission. None of us are on an island-- we trust our teammates to lend a hand when we’re stuck and our egos take a backseat to figuring out the best approach to tackling problems. We’re energized by tough problems and are excited to know that a challenge ahead of us does not have a textbook solution. Finally, we’re always in a posture of learning-- there is a lot we do not know but that does not hold us back from making an attempt at solutions. We lead thorough blameless postmortems to become better analysts, scientists, and leaders.,*DUE TO COVID-19 CANDIDATE WILL WORK FROM HOME UNTIL CLIENT OFFICES ARE RE-OPENED. CANDIDATE WILL BE REQUIRED TO BE ONSITE DAILY ONCE FACILITIES RE-OPEN.

The Data Analyst work assignments are varied and frequently require interpretation and independent determination of the appropriate courses of action. The Data Analyst will leverage operational and strategic decision making thru assorted reporting tasks, data interpretation, education, and consultation/collaboration with partners across the enterprise. The candidate should be able to build analysis and tools from multiple data sources that end users can easily learn and maintain.

Responsibilities:
• Data collection and manipulation from numerous sources (Oracle, SQL, Excel, etc.) with an understanding of database structure design
• Analyze data to solve a wide variety of business problems and creation of data visualizations that drive strategic vison
• Passion for contributing to a cross-functional team focused on continuously improving member experiences and clinical outcomes though data analysis and interpretation
• Ensure data quality, timeliness and accuracy
• Process thinking, independent problem solving and working collaboratively with the team

Requirements

Required Qualifications

• Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent experience
• 3+ years of technical experience in data reconciliation
• Expert level MS Excel and highly efficient in SQL
• Proficiency in compiling, analyzing, and interpreting data trends
• The ability to communicate effectively across levels and functions
• Self-starter – comfortable working independently to accomplish components of a larger program
• Strong organizational and time management skills
• Demonstrated excellence in problem solving/critical thinking

About us:

TA Digital is the only global boutique agency that delivers the “best of both worlds” to clients seeking to achieve organizational success through digital transformation. Unlike smaller, regional agencies that lack the ability to scale or large organizations that succumb to a quantity-over-quality approach, we offer resource diversity while also providing meticulous attention to the details that enable strategic success.

Over the past 20 years, TA Digital has positioned clients to achieve digital maturity by focusing on data, customer-centricity and exponential return on investment; by melding exceptional user experience and data-driven methodologies with artificial intelligence and machine learning, we enable digital transformations that intelligently build upon the strategies we set into motion. We are known as a global leader that assists marketing and technology executives in understanding the digital ecosystem while identifying cultural and operational gaps within their business - ultimately ushering organizations toward a more mature model and profitable digital landscape.

Recognized in 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2019 Inc. 5000 list as one of the most successful technology companies in the United States, TA Digital is pleased also to share high-level strategic partnerships with world class digital experience platform companies like Adobe, SAP and Salesforce and possess global partnerships with industry leaders such as Sitecore, Episerver, Elastic Path, BigCommerce, AWS, Azure and Coveo.

TA Digital has offices in US, Canada, UK and India. For more information, visit: www.tadigital.com

EOE & OFCCP Compliant regardless of: Minority / Female / Veteran / Disabled / Sexual Orientation / Gender Identity / National Origin,SOFT's client, located in XXXXXXXX is hiring a Technical Data Analyst for a long term contract position The selected candidate will work alongside other business analysts and report directly to the platform manager. Main tasks will include performing detailed requirements analysis, documenting processes, working cross functionally with multiple groups and performing some user acceptance testing. To succeed in this role you should have strong organizational skills; an analytical way of thinking; and be able to explain difficult concepts to non-technical users.

Analyst Responsibilities:
· Evaluating business features, anticipating requirements, uncovering areas for improvement, and handing off requirements to be developed/ implemented.
· Leading ongoing reviews of requirements, roadmaps, and developing optimization strategies.
· Working with multiple groups to identify metrics, then determine and prioritize work into a backlog.
· Effectively communicating your insights and plans to cross-functional team members and management.
· Gathering critical information from meetings with various stakeholders to create actionable improvements to analytics.
· Ensuring solutions meet business needs and requirements by testing and working with testing group for high quality implementations.
· Managing multiple projects, developing plans, and monitoring performance.
· Updating, implementing and maintaining procedures.
· Prioritizing initiatives based on business needs and requirements.
· Serving as a liaison between stakeholders to manage expectations and work through competing priorities.
· Monitoring deliverables and ensuring timely completion of projects.
· Adhoc Support – proficient in SQL (Hive)
· Responsible for Developing, maintaining, and managing advanced reporting, analytics, dashboards and other BI solutions.

Analyst Requirements:
· A bachelor’s degree in business or related field or an MBA.
· Exceptional analytical and conceptual thinking skills.
· The ability to influence stakeholders and work closely with them to determine acceptable solutions.
· Excellent documentation skills.
· Competency in Microsoft applications including Word, Excel, and Outlook.
· Excellent planning, organizational, and time management skills.
· Preferred: Code development skills, experience with YAML, or experience with SDLC, SQL (HIVE).
· A solid understanding of SQL, rational databases, and normalization.
· Proficiency in use of query and reporting analysis tools (Tableau, Pivot, Kibana).
· Nice to Have: Git, ElasticSearch, or data mining experience

Job Type: Contract

Pay: $1.00 - $2.00 per hour

Schedule:
Monday to Friday,Job Description
Job Title: Marketing/Communications - Data Analyst-Marketing//8278
Request ID: 8278-1
Duration : 6 months +
Oracle Location: Broomfield, Co Zip: 80021
Job Description:
**Candidate must be able to work onsite - can reside in the following cities in order to be local to Oracle office: Broomfield, CO - NYC - San Francisco - Saint Louis, MO - Bozeman, Montana***
**Contract could last anywhere from 3-6 months - potential to turn FTE***
Contractor will be the back end controller of Oracle Service Cloud (a lead generation system) . They will be responsible for maintaining the system on a daily basis by troubleshooting or escalating issues to Oracle Central Services/IT as needed. The contractor will look to optimize the system to make it more efficient for the team.
**Must Haves: 1. CRM systems experience (setting up/maintaining) 2. Proficiency in Excel (sequel, pivot tables, reporting) 3. Data-Driven/Analytical***
Oracle Data Cloud (ODC) is a division of Oracle that delivers digital audiences, context, and measurement products to a wide variety of advertising customers. Leading brands utilize our industry-leading purchase-based behavior data to get optimum results for cross-device marketing programs.
The ODC receives inbound inquiries based on our products and marketing available in the marketplace. As a Marketing Leads Operations Contractor working within the Marketing team, you will focus on managing the system and processes that receives inquiries. You will be the center of system optimizations, inquiry process improvements, and thinking about how to provide the biggest impact to the ODC, based on these leads and importance to Oracle. Oracle Service Cloud is our inquiry response program and the focus of this role.
Key responsibilities include:
• Understanding Oracle Service Cloud problems and providing process improvements over time
• Making changes in Service Cloud as updates are needed
• Work internally to look for system integrations that provide optimization
• Provide system automation in Service Cloud
• Work with engineers and internal teams when coding or resources are needed
• Maintaining the Oracle Service Cloud system
• Pull reporting /automate reporting in the system as needed
• Working with sales teams to understand processes and look for improvements as needed
• Providing service when/if the system is ever down

Skills and Qualifications:
• Ability to understand complex systems and workflows
• Ability to research complicated problems and engineer solutions through online research as needed
• Ability to write SQL queries
• Understanding of how CRM systems work and function
• Solid verbal, interpersonal and written communication skills with the ability to make client presentations
• Excellent organizational, time-management and multi-tasking skills
• Looking to continuously grow and learn and does not look for the path of least resistance
• Ability to think and act in an innovative and creative way
• Travel as needed
• BA/BS in business, engineering, or relevant discipline required
Preferred Qualifications
• Deep knowledge of Oracle Service Cloud (aka. RightNow) and how it works/functions
• 2-5 years of experience working with advertising agencies, media agencies, or digital media provider
• Preferred Knowledge of audience targeting and digital display, mobile, social and video technology
solid verbal, interpersonal
Release Comments:
**Candidate must be able to work onsite - can reside in the following cities in order to be local to Oracle office: Broomfield, CO - NYC - San Francisco - Saint Louis, MO - Bozeman, Montana***
**Contract could last anywhere from 3-6 months - potential to turn FTE***
Contractor will be the back end controller of Oracle Service Cloud (a lead generation system) . They will be responsible for maintaining the system on a daily basis by troubleshooting or escalating issues to Oracle Central Services/IT as needed. The contractor will look to optimize the system to make it more efficient for the team.
**Must Haves: 1. CRM systems experience (setting up/maintaining) 2. Proficiency in Excel (sequel, pivot tables, reporting) 3. Data-Driven/Analytical***
Thanks,
Amit Sehdev
APN Software Services Inc.
Direct: 510-402-1061 | Fax: 510-623-5055 | Amit@apninc.com