About Us:

NYSTEC is a non-profit technology consulting company, advising agencies, organizations, institutions, and businesses since 1996. Were independent and vendor-neutral so we have our clients best interests at heart. At NYSTEC, we know that we succeed when individuals and teams flourish personally and professionally, so our benefits and perks support this mindset. Are you ready to contribute to our engaged workforce and deliver the NYSTEC Experience?

About the Role:

As a Clinical Data Analyst, you will collaborate with team members to conceptualize, deliver, and support our clients through todays ever-changing landscape. NYSTEC is considered a trusted advisor, partner of choice and employer of choice. We believe every interaction is an opportunity to deliver exceptional service that empowers client success!

Serving as a Clinical Data Analyst, your day-to-day role as a NYSTEC consultant be providing analytical expertise to evaluate health information exchange organizations across New York State. Candidates will have the option to be based in our New York City or Albany office.

Key Responsibilities
Analyze the quality of clinical data from electronic health records and their conformance to national standards to elucidate areas of data quality improvement
Assess policies, processes, and technical solutions that facilitate the exchange of high-quality data, to inform statewide policy and program decision-makers
About You:

Required Qualifications
Proficiency in SQL
Strong knowledge of relational database principles
Proven experience analyzing large data sets, preferably in the healthcare industry.
Strong communication, documentation, critical thinking, and analytical skills
Ability to manage and develop key relationships with colleagues and clients through collaborative thinking and a strong customer focus
Ability to work independently and develop solutions to complex problems as part of a strategic team
Must be proficient with Microsoft Office
Preferred/Desired Qualifications
Experience with national data standards such as HL7, as well as coding systems (e.g., LOINC, ICD-10)
Fluency in Python (preferably Pandas and Numpy), knowledge of non-relational databases and/or knowledge of JSON
Familiarity with health information exchange and/or EHR messaging standards
Education and Experience
A minimum of a bachelors degree with at least 1 year of related experience in a technical, scientific, or related discipline is required. An equivalent combination of advanced education, training, and experience will be considered. Preference given to candidates with a graduate degree in health informatics, public health, statistics, computer science.
If youre an effective communicator who enjoys working in complex and collaborative environments, utilizing your critical thinking and research skills to develop solutions for clients, providing support to customers, and have the required education, experience and skills, we want to hear from you.

It is NYSTEC's policy to provide equal employment opportunity (EEO) to all individuals, regardless of actual or perceived race, color, creed, religion, sex or gender (including pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions), gender identity or gender expression (including transgender status), age, national origin, ancestry, citizenship status, physical or mental disability, protected medical condition as defined by applicable state or local law, genetic information, military service and veteran status, sexual orientation, marital status, , or any other characteristic protected by local, state, or federal law and ordinances. NYSTEC is strongly committed to this policy and believes in the concept and spirit of the law.

Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the United States without the need for visa sponsorship now or in the future.

Learn More About NYSTEC www.nystec.com,Our Mission

Move people.

Our Values

We are independent. Creative. Gutsy. We aren’t afraid to dream big. We are accountable. To our customers. To our cities. To each other. We are humble. Human. Lighthearted. We take our work seriously, but not ourselves.

Mobility is the lifeblood of urban environments and cities need affordable, emissions-free transportation options that are free of delays. We believe that shared electric mopeds will become an integral part of transit networks, filling gaps not served by bike share, car share, scooter share, or public transit.

About the role

We’re looking for a data scientist who can quickly and easily learn their way around a variety of data structures and technology. With access to warehouses of real-time geospatial data as well as business operations data, this role will work with the rest of the Data Science team to develop both predictive and descriptive reporting, visualize data, and automate associated processes. You will report to the Senior Analyst, Data Science and Analytics.

Requirements

Technical
2-3 years experience working as a data scientist/data analyst
An applied understanding of machine learning and other modeling techniques
Experience working with large data sets - geospatial data is a plus
Strong knowledge of R, Python and SQL, particularly Postgres and PostGIS
Experience with data visualization tools
Familiarity with AWS services such as Kinesis, S3, EC2, RDS, and Redshift
Ability to quickly understand new technologies and data environments
Experience with a Unix-based operating system
Non-technical
Strong written and verbal communication skills.
Ability to summarize key findings into clear and actionable recommendations, and to interact with individuals at all levels.
Strong project management skills and ability to plan and prioritize work in a fast-paced environment.
Sense of urgency and an ability to multitask
Team player and willing to pick up extra responsibilities as required
You are enthusiastic, reliable, and hardworking
You take your work seriously but not yourself
Responsibilities
Understand business needs across multiple tiers (for example, executive, operations and logistics, business strategy, customer acquisition and retention)
Build deep knowledge of relevant internal and external data repositories
Translate data into meaningful and insightful information for business users via appropriate tools
Work collaboratively with operations, customer success, marketing, product, finance, and other departments to help answer questions and define KPIs
Prioritize and respond to ad hoc requests for information from the business and productionalize as necessary
Build and automate visualizations and reporting,Impakt Advisors is a brand new (2018), NYC based Data Analytics advisory firm dedicated to providing easy and affordable analytics solutions for growing companies. We work across a wide range of industries including Ecommerce, Retail, Finance, Tech, Banking and Agriculture and our clients include startups hitting their stride as well as established members of the Fortune 500.
Our consultants manage complex priorities across many, internal and external, projects.

You will initially be apprenticed with one of our partners to pick up our business intelligence and working methodologies. Once you’ve shown an ability to take ownership over workstreams to an expected level of quality you will begin to play a project management role. You will be managing key client facing and development resources and you will learn how to work to achieve client goals through successful understanding and coordination of development.

If all that goes well, you will become the client facing expert on data analytics implementation projects.

You have the opportunity not just to join our growing international team but also to take on a leading role as we build our business through creating high impact results for our clients.


Key Responsibilities:
Every day is different, but here's a sample of what you can expect to experience and accomplish:
Keep inventory of client goals and challenges.
Understand client goals and use data in an automated way to achieve them.
Design and implement complex algorithms to generate metrics.
Manage the report production cycle, from data sourcing to metric verification.
Learn to manage expert development resources to execute on client goals
Assist in business development activities as necessary. Occasional travel

Key Requirements:
Bachelor's Degree
Proficiency with Microsoft Excel, Word, and PowerPoint.
SQL experience is a plus.
Desire to master SQL, Tableau and other business intelligence tools.
Excellent written and verbal communication skills.
Active listening
Ability to work both independently and as part of a team in a multi-task environment with attention to detail.
Ability to work under pressure and keep many competing priorities in order.
Ability to learn quickly in a self-directed manner.
Excellent work ethic, including a desire to learn continuously.

Things You'll Like About Impakt Advisors:
1. We value and encourage creative thinking & intellectual curiosity.
2. You'll have a very clear understanding of how your work matters to the company.
3. You'll find interesting new challenges every day on the forefront of data analysis.
4. You'll be part of a passionate team with broad skills and interests.
5. We offer competitive salaries, excellent benefits, and a relaxed work environment with plenty of perks.
6. We offer an opportunity to help grow a team from scratch - exciting and challenging working environment!

Your resume should include clear quantification of your achievements.

Our interview process consists of the following steps:
1. Group interview technical test examining:
Excel Skills
Business Writing Skills,
Causal Model Skills
SQL Aptitude
2. Screening interview
3. Culture Interview
4. Decision on Offer


*** This role does not provide H1B Visa Sponsorship or suit F-1 Visa holders.
*** Relocation assistance is not available for this position.,Praescient Analytics, LLC (Praescient) is a Veteran-led, certified Woman-Owned Small Business (WOSB) founded in 2011 that specializes in implementing advanced analytics solutions across the defense, intelligence, and law enforcement communities. With over 40 contracts across 6 continents, over 70% of our employees are veterans and or have intel/law enforcement experience. We fully understand the unique challenges of our clients and work to identify, vet, implement, and enhance commercial and proprietary technologies to provide full scope solutions, because we have been there. Praescient has extensive experience designing, developing, and integrating solutions for customers including the US Army, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), US Navy (USN), US Marine Corps (USMC), US Coast Guard (USCG), Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), intelligence community, and local law enforcement agencies, among others.The U.S. Attorney's Office and its investigative partners encounter urgent and complex investigative needs when investigating federal crimes or prosecuting civil cases. The standard IT systems made available through EOUSA are not designed to adequately support the data analytics needed to best advance these cases. The U.S. Attorney's Office requires access to a sophisticated, user-friendly, off the shelf analytics software package easily accessible from any user's government-furnished computer, or by agency partners via the internet. The government employees will be Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs), paralegals, analysts, and agents. They will be supported by on-site contractors. The criminal cases requiring data analytics include nearly every area of a case in the Office; violent crime, terrorism, public corruption, cybercrime, and narcotics trafficking, just to name a few. The civil cases include data-intensive areas such as opioid diversion and mortgage fraud. The challenges faced in our cases include, but are not limited to determining the scope of criminal activity involved in the scheme and the specific intent of illegal and/or foreign organizations and senior corporate officers who intentionally violate criminal statutes, financial institution and money laundering statutes, or pose a threat to the national security, foreign policy, or the economy of the United States. As such, the U.S. Attorney's Office requires sophisticated and specialized data analytic tools and support to load, organize, assimilate, and summarize large amounts of data, both structured and unstructured, and information related to major criminal investigations of corrupt public figures, cybercriminals, violent gangs, white-collar fraudsters, opioid traffickers, other targets actively pursued by our Civil Frauds unit who are engaged in systematic frauds perpetrated upon government agencies.Praescient Analytics is in search of a Mid-Level Data Analytics Solutions Analyst to provide support for projects related to investigations and litigation cases. This includes managing projects from initiation to closure, developing deliverables and serving as a primary point-of-contact for attorneys, investigators, and case teams.Primary Responsibilities:* Gather a wide variety of data types from primary and secondary sources through diverse channels using a combination of methods that will be researched and employed by the Data Analytics Management team.* Develop, maintain, and enforce streamlined and efficient processes for project lifecycles, from collection through transformation of data; manage timelines, training, resources, and budgets; and will finalize or assist the Program Manager in the finalization of client deliverables.* Support the collection, documentation, vetting and onboarding of data, provide direct support to the Data Analytics Engineer team on the database development and set up, and validate the population of data into the appropriate analytical tools.* Must have the ability to guide and assist Junior - level Data Analytics Solution Analysts as required.* Defining, developing, and communicating data analytics solutions to support the customer.* In this role you will take the lead in working with client case teams to identify their needs and jointly develop solutions through leveraging all available analytic and visualization options through the following:* Corresponding with key stakeholder personnel via regular consultations with clients to elicit requirements and provide regular status updates, performing data analysis and modeling to understand and identify data relationships/trends/classifications/predictions* Building experience in all available analysis and visualization software, proposing reporting solutions that best present the information to their supervisor.* Providing regular status updates to the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst - Senior regarding assigned tasks.* Ensuring successful completion of work, timeliness of deliverables, and quality control.* Delivering the completed solution.Required Qualifications:* Bachelor's degree or equivalent* Minimum of 3 years of experience using analytics tools, methods, and visualization software.* Significant experience in one or more of the following tools is required: Tableau Software; IBM I2/EIA; IBM Analyst Notebook; Database (SQL Server, Teradata, Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL); Programming and/or scripting (Python, R, Java); Natural Language Processing; Aster, Neo4j, or other graph databases; Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud environment; and Other analytic and visualization tools.* Strong SQL experience is required. Deep understanding of database, ETL, and analytics tools and concepts.* Background in Law Enforcement, Data Science, Investigation, Data Analysis, Computer Information Systems, or Statistics.* Experience working in AWS or other cloud environments.* Experience supporting federal agencies. Industry analytics/business intelligence knowledge including current industry trends, challenges, and data quality approaches. Must be able to work independently and prioritize work effectively, as well as to function as an effective team member in a local and virtual team development environment.Desired Qualifications:* The candidate should take the initiative to attack new challenges and learn new skills independently.* Must be well organized and flexible.* Interested in a diverse skillset in data analytics and has current skills in either data analysis, litigation support, statistical software, analytic programming languages (Python, R, Java, SAS), visualization software, or database management.What you can expect from us:* Real opportunity for career growth in an environment where your achievements will be celebrated* Constant collaboration with numerous teams to ensure client success* A team that respects and embraces your ideas and expertise* Coworkers that are motivated by pursuing excellence, rather than the prospect of personal gain* A workplace dedicated to supporting and bettering public safety and government agenciesBenefits:* Very competitive salary based on qualifications and experience* Comprehensive, Company paid United Health Care Medical for you and your family (We pay your premiums and deductibles)* 401(k) & 4% matching* Travel & performance incentives* 3 weeks paid time off (plus Federal Holidays)* $5K annual training allowance* $500 book allowance* Tuition reimbursement programPraescient Analytics is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all. Employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, gender identity, national origin, legally protected physical or mental disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or status in the uniformed services of the United States, status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era, or on any other basis which is protected under applicable law. This includes a commitment to provide a work environment that is free from all forms of illegal harassment including sexual harassment.This covers all terms and conditions of employment including (but not limited to):* Hiring, placement, promotion, transfer, or demotion of all job classifications;* Recruiting, advertising or solicitation for employment;* Treatment during employment;* Rates of pay or other forms of compensation;* Benefits;* Selection for training;* Company sponsored social and recreational activities; and* Layoff or terminationApplicants selected will be subject to a government security investigation and must meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information.US Citizenship RequiredPraescient Analytics is an Equal Opportunity Employer.Interested Candidates: Please forward your resume to recruiting@praescientanalytics.com and please visit our website to apply online at www.praescientanalytics.applicantstack.com/x/opening.,RGP is a global consulting firm helping some of the most recognized companies in the world work differently. Our success comes from a shared belief in rolling up our sleeves and doing the hard work of solving complex challenges, executing plans and implementing technology to help transform organizations.

Working as a consultant you will be connected to work that matters, putting your expertise to its best use while developing skills for the future. The result is a career defined by you, supported by RGP and built on tangible accomplishments.

As we continue to grow and deepen our impact on organizations around the world, we are looking for the right people to join us on our mission. If you are interested in being part of our team, there a few things you should know:
We are energized by challenges and the effort needed to solve them.
We like working with people who are positive, adaptable and growth-minded.
We care how work gets accomplished and are deeply invested in the success of our clients and our colleagues.
If this sounds like you, we invite you to read on and learn more.
THE RGP CONSULTING EXPERIENCE
RGP has a unique consulting model that provides opportunities for consultants to work in different ways. Most consultants work in a model where they have the flexibility and autonomy to choose projects aligning to their experience, skills and desired lifestyle. Other opportunities exist in team-based, strategy and solutions work. In all models, you will feel the full support of RGP to assist you in your work and guide you on your chosen path.
PURPOSE OF THE ROLE
As a Data Analyst, you will assist business leaders in making improved business decisions through the analysis of large data sets, creation of comprehensive reports and informed recommendations.

ATTRIBUTES OF CONSULTANTS WITH RGP
Respect for people and opinions and confidently offer your point-of-view with clients and among colleagues
A drive for proactively cultivating relationships with clients and colleagues
Optimism when faced with challenges and complex situations, coupled with the drive to solve client issues
Dedication to continuous improvement and development of your skillset and talents
A strong personal identification with RGPs values loyalty, integrity, focus, enthusiasm, accountability and talent
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ROLE
Analyze, manipulate, profile and extracts large data sets
Assist with documenting requirements
Build, review and modify data reports
Transfer knowledge to client team members to enable them to be self-sufficient in building and maintaining reports to address future needs
DESIRED EXPERIENCE AND REQUIREMENTS
Bachelors Degree in Finance, Accounting, MIS or other related business discipline required
5 to 10 years of data analysis experience
Strong understanding of financial statements and the interrelationship of the income statement, balance sheet and statement of cash flows, including account reconciliation and financial analysis skills
Excellent interpersonal communication skills
Capable of working independently; a self-starter
Experience with SAP or Oracle software required, including the ability to access reports and data as needed
Intermediate to Advanced Excel skills required, including strong data retrieval and downloading abilities, and proficiency with macros, PowerBI, PowerPivot, etc.
Technical capability in one or more of the following: SQL, Tableau, QlikView, Cognos, ERWin, etc. strongly preferred

Equal Opportunity Employer
RGP is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer and committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, genetic information or veteran status, and encourage all applicants to apply.,Hagerty Consulting (www.hagertyconsulting.com) is one of the nation’s leading emergency management and homeland security consulting firms. Known for its public spirit, innovative thinking, problem solving, and exceptional people, Hagerty is sought after to work on some of the largest, most complex, crisis and emergency management issues. Our services are focused on creating more resilient/sustainable jurisdictions, developing whole community operational plans, supporting recovery eligibility after disasters, and obtaining billion-dollar federal loans and grants..

We are looking for data analysts with experience in PowerBI, who are self starters, and ready to support our clients across the nation.


Responsibilities Include:

• Support existing reporting utilizing SAP, BI (BEx), Power BI, and Excel
• Develop best in practice tools and consistent standardized reporting dashboards for our clients, partners and senior management
• Continually identify and execute process improvements
• Proposal tool program manager
• Develop, maintain, and manage advanced reporting, analytics, dashboards and other BI solutions
• Problem solving / troubleshooting experience /skills to assist Production Support in issue resolution


Basic Qualifications:


• Candidates must have 2+ years of professional experience.
• 2+ years’ data analysis experience
• Excellent communication skills (must be able to interface with both technical and business leaders in the organization)
• Superior written and oral communication skills
• Expert knowledge of Excel functions


Additional Qualifications:

Strong SQL Experience
Power Pivot Experience
Proficiency in PowerBI
Experience in Tableau




EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
Hagerty Consulting, Inc. is fully committed to a strong equal opportunity program. Hagerty Consulting does not discriminate based on the following protected categories: Race, Color, Creed, Religion, National Origin, Ancestry, Age, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity (transgender status), Domestic Partner Status, Marital Status, Disability, AIDS/HIV Status, Height, and/or Weight.,Job Description
Cortex is a premier staffing & managed services company providing an array of services to clients ranging from Start-ups to global Fortune 500 companies in North America for over a decade.

We have an exciting Contract opportunity for a Business Data Analyst with one of our major Banking domain clients based out in NYC, NY

Skills: Business data analysis, Teradata, Wealth Management

Good Communication is must

Contact

For more details please contact Vinoth at 7326582854

If you are interested in this position, please submit your resume by responding to this Job.

Cortex is an equal opportunity employer. We are committed to a positive, supportive and inclusive environment.,60 months experience in SQL/SQL TOAD;
60 months experience with Excel;
60 months experience in messaging standards (XML, X12, etc);
60 months experience in HL7 messaging;
60 months experience in data quality analysis;
60 months experience in customer support/guidance;
Bachelor's Degree
Two candidates will support data exchange and data quality efforts for NYSIIS, including onboarding of providers to New York State Implementation Guide for HL7 version 2.5.1 Immunization Messages and verifying message compliance to the national ONC Meaningful Use requirements for electronic submission of immunization data.

The BA's will be responsible for maintaining and updating ACCESS programs. The BA's will perform technical activities to enhance interoperability of NYSIIS with electronic health records used by health care practices across New York State. Projected contract will end on January 30, 2023.;

Communicate with vendors and provider offices regarding HL7 file specifications and testing information and answering initial questions.Review and test data files from provider's Electronic Health Record (EHR) system to verify file formatting and completeness.

This will include a combination of manual review and use of automatic software tools.Work with provider office and EHR vendor to address any issues or concerns with test file.Assist provider office staff with data file submissions and addressing any questions or concerns that arise through data exchange.Monitor data exchange jobs to review the status of files that have been submitted to NYSIIS, identify errors and follow-up with provider office/vendor.

Assist provider office/EHR with significant data quality or file format issues discovered in data file submissions.Assist with the development and maintenance of materials documenting standard operating procedures for data exchange with NYSIIS.Maintain MS ACCESS tracking systems and compile statistics regarding EHR vendor and provider associations with each other and their communications with NYSIIS.

Perform general data analysis and generate reports to support data quality improvement activities to maintain a complete, accurate, timely data set.Develop and execute computer code required for data preparation and analysis; identify problems, and run standard data coverage reports.Monitor data exchange jobs to review the status of files that have been submitted to NYSIIS, identify errors and follow-up with provider office/vendor.,Project Overview

The Enterprise Data Governance Project aims to enable NYPA to manage its "Data-As-An-Asset” and to build the foundation for an enterprise data analytics platform at NYPA. This program will focus on enabling data stewardship, improving the quality of our data assets, increasing data security and protection, simplifying data integration and establishing better audit trail on data usage at NYPA
This program will implement Data Governance & Data Integration tools and processes to provide data owners and data consumers the ability to provision and access high quality, well-governed data for their day-to-day operations. In addition, it will help establish a strong foundation upon which to build a world-class Data Analytics capability that turns data into business insights more efficiently and effectively.
Job Functions & Responsibilities

Execution of the Data Discovery Project Phase 2
o Conduct data discovery stakeholder interviews with business and IT stakeholders (selected applications)
o Identify data sets, develop data flows, understand data-related processes and identify key data issues for each application
o Update of Enterprise Data Flow diagrams and Enterprise Data Catalog inventory
o Creation of Application Playback decks and Data Discovery report & presentation
Enablement of Data Roles within NYPA
o Maintenance of datasets and data roles in the Enterprise Data Catalog - additions, updates and deletions
o Identification of updates / changes to existing data roles for the datasets in the NYPA Data Catalog
o Perform onboarding, transition and education of NYPA stakeholders for the Data Roles at the enterprise (Data Owner, Data Steward, Data Custodian)
o Conduct of quarterly Data Owner meetings to communicate upcoming Data Governance initiatives / processes / policies / best practices
Lead in onboarding and implementation of Collibra Data Governance tool
o Onboarding of new datasets into Data Governance tool
o Establishment of Data Catalog and shop-for-data feature in Data Governance tool
o Manage metadata ingestion (manual and automated) from different sources
o Creation of new workflows in Collibra Data Governance tool
New custom workflow for Data Access Request
New custom workflow for Business Glossary – from proposal to approval
New custom workflow for asset creation, review and validation
o Training and onboarding of NYPA stakeholders to Collibra
Development of new Data Governance Policies, Procedures and Standards
Develop and operationalize new Data Access Request process
o Design of new Enterprise Data Request Process, based on ongoing pilot feedback
o Implementation of new Data Request Process - app by app – working with application owners and business stakeholders
o Communication and training of all enterprise users on new Data Request Process
Development and execution of Change Management plan for Data Discovery, Data Access Request and operationalization of new Data Governance workflows
Skills

• Strong knowledge of Data Governance & Quality - policies, processes and tools
• Strong experience & expertise in using Collibra Data Governance tool
• Knowledge (experience preferred) using Trillium Data Quality tool and integration with Collibra
• Working experience in implementing Data Governance policies and processes
• Strong presentation & communication skills
• Ability to work with Senior Leaders
• Experience working on teams that work under Agile principles
Education & Certifications

• Undergraduate degree in Engineering, Computer Science, Data Management, or similar field of study. Graduate degree preferred.
• 3+ years of demonstrated Data Governance experience
• Minimum of Level 2 Certification in Collibra required,APCO Insight works with many of the world’s leading companies, associations, nonprofits and public-sector organizations on a diverse range of challenges. Our core research capabilities support reputation management, brand and campaign communications, issues and crisis management, message and creative development, thought leadership, and consumer and cultural trends.

The data science Research Analyst will support APCO Insight data science team members in executing advanced data analytics assignments on behalf of the organization and clients.

APCO Insight’s data science team is increasingly involved in assignments employing statistics (e.g., linear/logistics regression, clustering) to develop insights for communication strategy. The candidate will be involved in secondary research techniques, digital and social media research, and structured/unstructured data analytics.

Responsibilities

Data science assignments involve four core areas: (1) Software, (2) Analytics Methodology Selection, (3) Analytics Execution and (4) Data Storytelling. The candidate is expected to:
Provide day-to-day support of quantitative data-related projects
Prepare and monitor quantitative data collection
Pull data from software sources, such as social listening and media monitoring
Clean, code and manage unstructured (text) datasets
Conduct data analysis including advanced statistical techniques such significance testing, mean, standard deviation, regression, clustering, etc.
Ensure data and reporting quality
Use digital research tools to analyze the conversation landscape and identify target audiences and influencers
Visualize data insights using charts, graphs and tables and develop reports in PowerPoint or Tableau
Write clearly to communicate with colleagues, research partners and clients
Qualifications
1-2 years of relevant experience
Bachelor’s degree in Mathematics, Marketing or Business from an accredited college or university in a related field
Excellent PowerPoint & Excel skills
Proficient with SPSS, R or other comparable statistical programs
Working knowledge of descriptive and inferential statistics, strong analytical skills
Familiarity with or willingness to learn digital and social media research tools such as Quid, Affinio, Brandwatch, Talkwalker or other similar programs
Able to multi-task, strong time management and organizational skills
Excellent written and oral skills and the ability to communicate within an organization
Furthermore, the ideal candidate will have an interest in working on a start-up team in an entrepreneurial team within APCO Insight to help develop new products and methodologies to sell to clients and prospects around reputation management, corporate branding, thought leadership and/or public affairs issues management.

Founded in 1984, APCO Worldwide is an award-winning, independently owned global communication and business strategy firm with offices in major cities throughout North America, Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Asia. APCO combines a global perspective with local expertise to help clients around the world manage challenges, opportunities, perceptions and reputations. APCO clients include corporations and governments; industry associations and nonprofit organizations; and six of the top 10 companies on the Fortune 500. The firm is a majority women-owned business.

APCO Worldwide, named “Public Affairs Agency of the Decade” by The Holmes Report and one of the “Top Places to Work in PR” by PRNews, offers a collegial work environment, countless training and development opportunities, and a competitive compensation and benefits package.

EOE M/F/V/D

Are you ready to challenge convention and challenge yourself?,WorkforceLogiq is currently hiring for a Data Analyst for our Haworth, NJ location. This is a contract position for 3 months with the opportunity of extending. The hourly rate for this role will depend on experience and will range from $17.00/hr -$19.50/hr.

Review 40-60 work orders, analyze field reports, and make changes to work orders accordingly.
Analysis and manipulation using multiple data sources in Excel; will require use of VLOOKUP and filtering techniques
Generation of template files and downloading and pre-processing of multiple datasets
Send manager reports once a week on completed work orders.
Other responsibilities may be assigned with time.

High attention to detail
Proficient with Windows environment
Advanced with Microsoft Excel
Good Communication (verbal and non-verbal)
Familiarity with SharePoint (Preferred but not required)
Will be using: Infor, SharePoint, and Excel heavily
#zr,Praescient Analytics, LLC (Praescient) is a Veteran-led, certified Woman-Owned Small Business (WOSB) founded in 2011 that specializes in implementing advanced analytics solutions across the defense, intelligence, and law enforcement communities. With over 40 contracts across 6 continents, over 70% of our employees are veterans and or have intel/law enforcement experience. We fully understand the unique challenges of our clients and work to identify, vet, implement, and enhance commercial and proprietary technologies to provide full scope solutions, because we have been there. Praescient has extensive experience designing, developing, and integrating solutions for customers including the US Army, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), US Navy (USN), US Marine Corps (USMC), US Coast Guard (USCG), Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), intelligence community, and local law enforcement agencies, among others.The U.S. Attorney's Office and its investigative partners encounter urgent and complex investigative needs when investigating federal crimes or prosecuting civil cases. The standard IT systems made available through EOUSA are not designed to adequately support the data analytics needed to best advance these cases. The U.S. Attorney's Office requires access to a sophisticated, user-friendly, off the shelf analytics software package easily accessible from any user's government-furnished computer, or by agency partners via the internet. The government employees will be Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs), paralegals, analysts, and agents. They will be supported by on-site contractors. The criminal cases requiring data analytics include nearly every area of a case in the Office; violent crime, terrorism, public corruption, cybercrime, and narcotics trafficking, just to name a few. The civil cases include data-intensive areas such as opioid diversion and mortgage fraud. The challenges faced in our cases include, but are not limited to determining the scope of criminal activity involved in the scheme and the specific intent of illegal and/or foreign organizations and senior corporate officers who intentionally violate criminal statutes, financial institution and money laundering statutes, or pose a threat to the national security, foreign policy, or the economy of the United States. As such, the U.S. Attorney's Office requires sophisticated and specialized data analytic tools and support to load, organize, assimilate, and summarize large amounts of data, both structured and unstructured, and information related to major criminal investigations of corrupt public figures, cybercriminals, violent gangs, white-collar fraudsters, opioid traffickers, other targets actively pursued by our Civil Frauds unit who are engaged in systematic frauds perpetrated upon government agencies.Praescient Analytics is in search of a Junior Data Analytics Solutions Analyst to provide support for projects related to investigations and litigation cases. This includes assisting the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst team as needed in support of analytics solutions for attorneys, investigators, and case teams.Primary Responsibilities:* Gather a wide variety of data types from primary and secondary sources through diverse channels using a combination of methods that will be researched and employed by the Data Analytics Management team.* Assist with developing, maintaining, and enforcing streamlined and efficient processes for project lifecycles, from collection through transformation of data; and will support the team's goals for timelines, training, resources, and budgets in support of the finalization of client deliverables.* Support the collection, documentation, vetting and onboarding of data, will provide input to the Data Analytics Engineer team on the database development and set up, and assist with validating the population of data into the appropriate analytical tools.* Assist in the defining, developing, and communicating data analytics solutions to support the customer which includes:* Corresponding with key stakeholder personnel via regular consultations with clients to elicit requirements and provide regular status updates, performing data analysis and modeling to understand and identify data relationships/trends/classifications/predictions* Building experience in all available analysis and visualization software, proposing reporting solutions that best present the information to their supervisor.* Providing regular status updates to the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst - Senior regarding assigned tasks.* Ensuring successful completion of work, timeliness of deliverables, and quality control.Required Qualifications:* Bachelor's degree or equivalent* Minimum of 1 year of experience using analytics tools, methods, and visualization software.* Strong analytical, problem solving, and communication skills with a keen attention to detail.* Experience in one or more of the following tools: Tableau Software; IBM I2/EIA; IBM Analyst Notebook; Database (SQL Server, Teradata, Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL); Programming and/or scripting (Python, R, Java); Natural Language Processing; Neo4j or other graph databases; Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud environment; and Other analytic and visualization tools.* General understanding of database, ETL, and analytics tools and concepts.Desired Qualifications:* The candidate should take the initiative to attack new challenges and learn new skills independently.* Must be well organized and flexible.* Interested in a diverse skillset in data analytics and has current skills in either data analysis, litigation support, statistical software, analytic programming languages (Python, R, Java, SAS), visualization software, or database management.What you can expect from us:* Real opportunity for career growth in an environment where your achievements will be celebrated* Constant collaboration with numerous teams to ensure client success* A team that respects and embraces your ideas and expertise* Coworkers that are motivated by pursuing excellence, rather than the prospect of personal gain* A workplace dedicated to supporting and bettering public safety and government agenciesBenefits:* Very competitive salary based on qualifications and experience* Comprehensive, Company paid United Health Care Medical for you and your family (We pay your premiums and deductibles)* 401(k) & 4% matching* Travel & performance incentives* 3 weeks paid time off (plus Federal Holidays)* $5K annual training allowance* $500 book allowance* Tuition reimbursement programPraescient Analytics is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all. Employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, gender identity, national origin, legally protected physical or mental disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or status in the uniformed services of the United States, status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era, or on any other basis which is protected under applicable law. This includes a commitment to provide a work environment that is free from all forms of illegal harassment including sexual harassment.This covers all terms and conditions of employment including (but not limited to):* Hiring, placement, promotion, transfer, or demotion of all job classifications;* Recruiting, advertising or solicitation for employment;* Treatment during employment;* Rates of pay or other forms of compensation;* Benefits;* Selection for training;* Company sponsored social and recreational activities; and* Layoff or terminationApplicants selected will be subject to a government security investigation and must meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information.US Citizenship RequiredPraescient Analytics is an Equal Opportunity Employer.Interested Candidates: Please forward your resume to recruiting@praescientanalytics.com and please visit our website to apply online at www.praescientanalytics.applicantstack.com/x/opening.,Praescient Analytics, LLC (Praescient) is a Veteran-led, certified Woman-Owned Small Business (WOSB) founded in 2011 that specializes in implementing advanced analytics solutions across the defense, intelligence, and law enforcement communities. With over 40 contracts across 6 continents, over 70% of our employees are veterans and or have intel/law enforcement experience. We fully understand the unique challenges of our clients and work to identify, vet, implement, and enhance commercial and proprietary technologies to provide full scope solutions, because we have been there. Praescient has extensive experience designing, developing, and integrating solutions for customers including the US Army, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), US Navy (USN), US Marine Corps (USMC), US Coast Guard (USCG), Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), intelligence community, and local law enforcement agencies, among others. The U.S. Attorney's Office and its investigative partners encounter urgent and complex investigative needs when investigating federal crimes or prosecuting civil cases. The standard IT systems made available through EOUSA are not designed to adequately support the data analytics needed to best advance these cases. The U.S. Attorney's Office requires access to a sophisticated, user-friendly, off the shelf analytics software package easily accessible from any user's government-furnished computer, or by agency partners via the internet. The government employees will be Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs), paralegals, analysts, and agents. They will be supported by on-site contractors. The criminal cases requiring data analytics include nearly every area of a case in the Office; violent crime, terrorism, public corruption, cybercrime, and narcotics trafficking, just to name a few. The civil cases include data-intensive areas such as opioid diversion and mortgage fraud. The challenges faced in our cases include, but are not limited to determining the scope of criminal activity involved in the scheme and the specific intent of illegal and/or foreign organizations and senior corporate officers who intentionally violate criminal statutes, financial institution and money laundering statutes, or pose a threat to the national security, foreign policy, or the economy of the United States. As such, the U.S. Attorney's Office requires sophisticated and specialized data analytic tools and support to load, organize, assimilate, and summarize large amounts of data, both structured and unstructured, and information related to major criminal investigations of corrupt public figures, cybercriminals, violent gangs, white-collar fraudsters, opioid traffickers, other targets actively pursued by our Civil Frauds unit who are engaged in systematic frauds perpetrated upon government agencies. Praescient Analytics is in search of a Mid-Level Data Analytics Solutions Analyst to provide support for projects related to investigations and litigation cases. This includes managing projects from initiation to closure, developing deliverables and serving as a primary point-of-contact for attorneys, investigators, and case teams. Primary Responsibilities: * Gather a wide variety of data types from primary and secondary sources through diverse channels using a combination of methods that will be researched and employed by the Data Analytics Management team. * Develop, maintain, and enforce streamlined and efficient processes for project lifecycles, from collection through transformation of data; manage timelines, training, resources, and budgets; and will finalize or assist the Program Manager in the finalization of client deliverables. * Support the collection, documentation, vetting and onboarding of data, provide direct support to the Data Analytics Engineer team on the database development and set up, and validate the population of data into the appropriate analytical tools. * Must have the ability to guide and assist Junior - level Data Analytics Solution Analysts as required. * Defining, developing, and communicating data analytics solutions to support the customer. * In this role you will take the lead in working with client case teams to identify their needs and jointly develop solutions through leveraging all available analytic and visualization options through the following: * Corresponding with key stakeholder personnel via regular consultations with clients to elicit requirements and provide regular status updates, performing data analysis and modeling to understand and identify data relationships/trends/classifications/predictions * Building experience in all available analysis and visualization software, proposing reporting solutions that best present the information to their supervisor. * Providing regular status updates to the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst - Senior regarding assigned tasks. * Ensuring successful completion of work, timeliness of deliverables, and quality control. * Delivering the completed solution. Required Qualifications: * Bachelor's degree or equivalent * Minimum of 3 years of experience using analytics tools, methods, and visualization software. * Significant experience in one or more of the following tools is required: Tableau Software; IBM I2/EIA; IBM Analyst Notebook; Database (SQL Server, Teradata, Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL); Programming and/or scripting (Python, R, Java); Natural Language Processing; Aster, Neo4j, or other graph databases; Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud environment; and Other analytic and visualization tools. * Strong SQL experience is required. Deep understanding of database, ETL, and analytics tools and concepts. * Background in Law Enforcement, Data Science, Investigation, Data Analysis, Computer Information Systems, or Statistics. * Experience working in AWS or other cloud environments. * Experience supporting federal agencies. Industry analytics/business intelligence knowledge including current industry trends, challenges, and data quality approaches. Must be able to work independently and prioritize work effectively, as well as to function as an effective team member in a local and virtual team development environment. Desired Qualifications: * The candidate should take the initiative to attack new challenges and learn new skills independently. * Must be well organized and flexible. * Interested in a diverse skillset in data analytics and has current skills in either data analysis, litigation support, statistical software, analytic programming languages (Python, R, Java, SAS), visualization software, or database management. What you can expect from us: * Real opportunity for career growth in an environment where your achievements will be celebrated * Constant collaboration with numerous teams to ensure client success * A team that respects and embraces your ideas and expertise * Coworkers that are motivated by pursuing excellence, rather than the prospect of personal gain * A workplace dedicated to supporting and bettering public safety and government agencies Benefits: * Very competitive salary based on qualifications and experience * Comprehensive, Company paid United Health Care Medical for you and your family (We pay your premiums and deductibles) * 401(k) & 4% matching * Travel & performance incentives * 3 weeks paid time off (plus Federal Holidays) * $5K annual training allowance * $500 book allowance * Tuition reimbursement program Praescient Analytics is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all. Employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, gender identity, national origin, legally protected physical or mental disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or status in the uniformed services of the United States, status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era, or on any other basis which is protected under applicable law. This includes a commitment to provide a work environment that is free from all forms of illegal harassment including sexual harassment. This covers all terms and conditions of employment including (but not limited to): * Hiring, placement, promotion, transfer, or demotion of all job classifications; * Recruiting, advertising or solicitation for employment; * Treatment during employment; * Rates of pay or other forms of compensation; * Benefits; * Selection for training; * Company sponsored social and recreational activities; and * Layoff or termination Applicants selected will be subject to a government security investigation and must meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information. US Citizenship Required Praescient Analytics is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Interested Candidates: Please forward your resume to and please visit our website to apply online at www.praescientanalytics.applicantstack.com/x/opening.,Senior Data Scientist in the Analytics Team for the digital transformation program within Wholesale Credit Technology. Senior Data Analyst will be responsible for Software developers design, code, test, debug, document programs as well as maintain corporate systems architecture. Employees work closely with business partners in defining requirements for system applications. Employees typically have in-depth knowledge of development tools and languages. Employees are expected to have in-depth global markets and credit product knowledge, and manage a high level of risk. Is clearly recognized as a content expert by peers. I
The scope of projects include Descriptive, Predictive and Prescriptive Analytics, as well asm NLP activities such as document classification, even detection and data extraction.
Cultivate the team and the infrastructure to support modeling and analyzing both structured and unstructured data for Wholesale Credit Business lines.
Develop value-added analytics and NLP solutions that support revenue generation, business insight, risk management, operational efficiency, regulatory compliance, loan pricing, pre and post-sale loan facility research.
These solutions must overcome issues of complex data (e.g., VLDB, multi-structured, "big data", etc.) as well as deployment of advanced techniques (e.g., machine learning, text mining, statistical analysis, etc.) to deliver insights.
Determine best practices in the areas of NLP, Data Science and Machine Learning.
Facilitate the use of these technologies within the non-retail loan business and loan system applications including Pricing and Credit and other fulfillment and underwriting activities in Wholesale Credit business processes.
Liaise with Global Banking and Markets and Enterprise Level teams to determine the best practices in the firm and contribute to improving proficiency in these areas for WCBT, and the firm more generally.
Work with the Robotics and Analytics Swat Team during project intake and present new technologies that relate to solutions for high ROI applications of analytics.
Manage projects and mentor other Data Scientists.
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:
MS and/or Ph.D. degree in related field preferred or substantial equivalent experience.
Management experience a plus
Typically requires a minimum of 7-10+ years as a practitioner of machine learning in Financial Markets.
#CB,Data Analyst (Little Ferry, NJ) -

Develop automated business review reports from the ground up, providing the cross-functional teams with the necessary tools to make timely business decisions, including key metrics and important; retail analytics; Work to develop omni-channel marketing campaigns targeted to purposefully steer customer behavior; Interpret, analysis of collected data using different tools, statistical techniques such as MS Excel and data management systems to provide accurate & reliable reports to the company; access data from internal databases and build and maintain data systems; develop a healthy data collection systems & sound strategies for getting quality data from different sources to use it to right place efficiently; prepare presentations, conducting research and maintaining quality of database systems; assist database administrators in database administration, design, security also timely maintenance of data base as well; prepare various statistical reports on operational performance on monthly, quarterly and annual basis; Prepare drafts and develops standards for different reports on data management systems; monitors, train and giving direction on the work of lower-level staff. Relocation/telecommuting may be required plus travel to various unanticipated client locations within the United States for short and long term assignments.

Languages, skills and tools: HTML, .NET, ASP.NET, C#, ASP, Web Service, XML, HTML, CSS, Visual Basic, Dreamweaver, SQL Server, MS Access, Visual Studio, Crystal Reports, CSS3, JQuery, Javascript, MVC, WCF, Web API, JSON, AJAX, T-SQL, TFS, GitHub, TeamCity, Octopus, MS Test, MS Build, SSRS, SOAP UI, Fiddler, Agile

Education : Bachelors in Computer Science/Computer Applications/Engineering (Electronics and Communication/Electrical) plus 2 years of progressive experience in related fields. Will accept foreign education.,Job Title :Senior SQL Data Analyst

No of Openings :2

Position Type :Contract to Hire

Master Job Title :Data Analyst

Type of project :Assessment/Analysis

Branch :New Jersey

Branch Code :Stamford

Projected Start Date :11-18-2019

Projected End Date :11-03-2020

Vendor Pay Rate :$47/hr on w2

Client Company :WF - WBS

Zip Code :07092

City :Summit

State :NJ

Report To :

Required Skills :

Senior Data Analyst, Financial experience, data mapping, data profiling, strong SQL skills

Basic Qualifications :

Additional Skills :

Job Description :

Apex Systems combines with parent company On Assignment to make it the 2nd largest IT staffing agency in the country.

Â

Apex has an opportunity for aÂSQL Data AnalystÂfor a client inÂSummit, New Jersey.ÂI

Â

Here are the details:

Â

Position: SQL Data Analyst

Location: Summit, New Jersey

Rate: NegotiableÂ

Duration: 24+ Month W2 Rolling Contract (Potential to Go Perm)

Â

Day-to-Day Responsibilities:Â
Align with business to capture requirements and data needs.
Understand and document business needs and data flows.
Perform various data analysis and profiling techniques.
Champion the usage of data in business.
Prepare source to target data mapping.
Collaborate with Technology teams.
Ability to propose data solutions for disparate business needs/projects.
Â

Must Haves:
Data Analysis experience working directly with the business
Strong SQL skills (querying, modelling, etc)
Data mapping/data lineage experience
Â

Nice to Haves:
Financial Services Experience
Â

Selling Points for Candidates:Â
Describe the culture: (use hot sheet if updated) attached
Learning Opportunities / Career path for the role:
Potential to go perm, group is tripling workload
Â

Notes :

Selling points for candidate :

Project Verification Info :

Candidate must be your W2 Employee :Yes

Exclusive to Apex :Yes

Face to face interview required :Yes

Candidate must be local :Yes

Candidate must be authorized to work without sponsorship :No

Interview times set :No

Background Check :Yes

Drug Screen :Yes

Â,Consumer Lending Data Analyst
New York, 605 Third Avenue


Job Reference: NY6T-ANA-10342

Location: New York, 605 Third Avenue

Closing Date: 31/07/2020

Department: Analyst

Division: Informa Intelligence
AddThis Sharing Buttons
Share to LinkedInLinkedInShare to FacebookFacebookShare to TwitterTwitterShare to EmailEmailShare to MoreAddThis

Consumer Lending Data Analyst | Financial Intelligence | New York, New York

Informa is seeking an ambitious Consumer Lending Data Analyst to join our Informa Financial Intelligence Consumer Lending team in New York, New York. This role is a fantastic opportunity to help financial services companies leverage our data and turn insights into action. No day will feel the same in this fast-paced role as you will be involved in Informa’s Financial Intelligence Banking division.

In this role you will:

The Consumer Lending Data Analyst position is responsible for the supporting the successful adoption of Informa Financial Intelligence Consumer Lending solution set. Success is measured based on the effectiveness of the solution set in driving Informa’s Consumer Lending client acquisition, retention and services utilized. Achievement in this position will be driven by the candidate’s ability to proactively engage and work with clients and market analysts to adopt Informa’s platform to support margin, share, risk and operational objectives. The candidate will be an experienced voice within the lending industry and a collaborative team member who can work jointly with Informa’s business development team and technology/analytics team to accelerate the growth rate of Informa’s Financial Intelligence solutions.

Key Responsibilities:
Solutions Support
Serves as a leader for building and implementing new services and tools and enhancements of existing services needed by the consumer lending industry to support lenders’ achievement of margin, share, risk and operational objectives
Works with leadership to develop and maintain a structured matrix for aligning identified solutions to specific target market segments based on key dimensions (e.g., lending type, lender size, competitive strategy)
Works collaboratively with technology team to build specifications and requirements for all capabilities pursuant to lending solutions
Assists in designing new reporting and processes by analyzing requirements; constructing workflow charts and diagrams; studying system capabilities; writing specifications.
Proactively solicits client feedback for ongoing improvements and enhancement of services
Solutions Adoption
Supports business development team in pursuing high value prospect opportunities by providing data insights from the available data sets
Provides practitioner-level experience for how to apply tools and best practices to maximize the value of clients’ relationship with Informa
Support initial training and client configuration process for new client installs of configurable solutions
Provides references for users by writing and maintaining user documentation; providing help desk support; training users.
Has ability to independently answer questions from customers about the data by utilizing advanced data analysis tools
What you'll need to succeed:
5-10 years’ experience in consumer lending (Fintech experience a plus!)
Background in consulting delivering solutions to customers
Strong organizational skills, with proven ability to manage own time and work to deadlines
Good analytical and problem-solving skills
Attention to detail
Confident in presenting actionable insights to customers
Advanced in us of Tableau, SQL and Microsoft Office
Digitally savvy, with an interest and understanding of emerging trends in financial services
Driven by results; a self-starter
Positive, pro-active attitude
Desire to learn and build on current knowledge base
Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of Science is highly preferable
Who we are:

We provide actionable insight to help you make smarter decisions.

Informa provides financial institutions with the intelligent advantage to make informed decisions, understand past trends, forecast future performance, drive profitability, and increase returns. We offer our clients market leading competitive benchmarking, customer analytics, and specialized data.

https://financialintelligence.informa.com/

About Informa:

Informa is a leading business intelligence, academic publishing, knowledge and events business, operating in the Knowledge and Information Economy. We are listed on the London Stock Exchange and a member of the FTSE 100.

What makes Informa different:
Access to a global community of colleagues, brands and opportunities
Competitive Benefits with 401k match
Generous vacation days, 9 company holidays and time off to volunteer!
Work- Life Balance
Paid parental leave
Volunteer days
Sharematch
Informa Awards to celebrate individual and team success
4 weeks parental leave
Informa is committed to equal employment opportunity for all employees and applicants for employment without regard to age, color, creed, disability status, gender, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation or veteran status, or any other legally protected status.,The Client

Our Client, operating in the Hospitality sector, is seeking an enthusiastic and ambitious Data Analyst.

Main Duties
Interpret data and analyze results
Provide analytical reporting and create data dashboards, graphs and visualisations
Mine and analyse large datasets, draw valid interpretations and present them successfully to management using a reporting tool
Assist in developing and implementing data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality


Requirements
Proven working experience as a data analyst or business data analyst with excellent numerical and analytical skills
Strong aptitude for collecting data from many sources, carry out analyses and provide insight from
the findings
Technical expertise regarding data models, database development, data mining and segmentation
techniques
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing data
Fluent in English

ALL CANDIDATES MUST BE ELIGIBLE TO WORK IN EU

Should you require further information, please, call David on +356 2099 4444 or +356 9999 0319

For all our active vacancies please visit: https://www.quadconsultancy.com/recruitment,Data Analyst III Design and implement a data strategy to support business use cases focused on multi-vector analysis using various natural language processing and machine learning techniques.

10165037 - Data Analyst III

Location New York, NY

Duration - 6 Months

Pay Rate: $850.00/ day on W2

Roles & Responsibilities:
Partner with senior business sponsors, platform supervision, compliance, and business management to enhance a highly visible holistic supervisory and surveillance platform
Design and implement a data strategy to support business use cases focused on multi-vector analysis using various natural language processing and machine learning techniques
Primary focus is to analyze available structured and un-structured information, apply data mining techniques, perform statistical analysis, and provide methods (algorithmic and technical) to create actionable alerts and reduce false-positives
Develop and enhance software solutions to meet business requirements
Gather and document technical requirements and specifications
Attend regular meetings and interface with internal and external teams related to the project
Work with the project PM and BAs to provide input on schedules and implementation best practices
Work on multiple tasks and respect aggressive schedule
Work in a fast paced environment. Support may include extra hours, nights and weekends.
Minimum required qualifications
Bachelors Degree in engineering, math, statistics, physics or other technical field
At least 2 years of experience with Big Data technologies including large data stores like Hadoop, Elastic, Apache Solr, Lucene and comparable stacks
Advanced knowledge of Python and JSON with at least 3 years of experience
Advanced knowledge of SQL systems, with at least 5 years of experience developing in Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, PostgreSQL, MySQL
Advanced knowledge or experience with any of the NoSQL systems such as Cassandra, CouchDB, MongoDB, HBase, MarkLogic, Neo4J, Redis, and others
Experience with JAVA, J2EE, JavaScript, Perl
Proven track record of implementing internal and/or external Big Data solutions
Proven ability to find hidden insights and patterns within historical data
Experienced with Machine Learning
Knowledge of Cloud Computing (AWS, Azure, Google)
Basic understanding of project lifecycle stages Requirements Gathering to Post Implementation
Experienced as a team player working in a global team
Ability to manage conflicting requests on time in a continually fast moving environment
Must be a self-starter with attention to detail
Strong communications (written and oral) skills in a front-office setting
Preferred qualifications:
Masters Degree in engineering, math, statistics, physics or other technical field
Experience with Front Office traders, IT support and Operation teams in a Capital Markets domain.
Knowledge of ElasticSearch, Apache Solr, Python
Experience with machine learning, natural language processing, AI, or robotics is a plus
FINRA Registrations Required: N/A

Powered by JazzHR,Strong Healthcare Domain background Collects, analyzes and interprets provider data. Provides ad hoc reporting, querying data and creating usable reports. Experience working with EMR's, Athena, Provider Data experience is must Hands on experience analysing large complex databases, t-SQL. Must have excellent written and verbal communication skills, good documentation experience.,Praescient Analytics, LLC (Praescient) is a Veteran-led, certified Woman-Owned Small Business (WOSB) founded in 2011 that specializes in implementing advanced analytics solutions across the defense, intelligence, and law enforcement communities. With over 40 contracts across 6 continents, over 70% of our employees are veterans and or have intel/law enforcement experience. We fully understand the unique challenges of our clients and work to identify, vet, implement, and enhance commercial and proprietary technologies to provide full scope solutions, because we have been there. Praescient has extensive experience designing, developing, and integrating solutions for customers including the US Army, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), US Navy (USN), US Marine Corps (USMC), US Coast Guard (USCG), Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), intelligence community, and local law enforcement agencies, among others.The U.S. Attorney's Office and its investigative partners encounter urgent and complex investigative needs when investigating federal crimes or prosecuting civil cases. The standard IT systems made available through EOUSA are not designed to adequately support the data analytics needed to best advance these cases. The U.S. Attorney's Office requires access to a sophisticated, user-friendly, off the shelf analytics software package easily accessible from any user's government-furnished computer, or by agency partners via the internet. The government employees will be Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs), paralegals, analysts, and agents. They will be supported by on-site contractors. The criminal cases requiring data analytics include nearly every area of a case in the Office; violent crime, terrorism, public corruption, cybercrime, and narcotics trafficking, just to name a few. The civil cases include data-intensive areas such as opioid diversion and mortgage fraud. The challenges faced in our cases include, but are not limited to determining the scope of criminal activity involved in the scheme and the specific intent of illegal and/or foreign organizations and senior corporate officers who intentionally violate criminal statutes, financial institution and money laundering statutes, or pose a threat to the national security, foreign policy, or the economy of the United States. As such, the U.S. Attorney's Office requires sophisticated and specialized data analytic tools and support to load, organize, assimilate, and summarize large amounts of data, both structured and unstructured, and information related to major criminal investigations of corrupt public figures, cybercriminals, violent gangs, white-collar fraudsters, opioid traffickers, other targets actively pursued by our Civil Frauds unit who are engaged in systematic frauds perpetrated upon government agencies.Praescient Analytics is in search of a Senior Data Analytics Solutions Analyst to provide support for projects related to investigations and litigation cases. This includes managing projects from initiation to closure, developing deliverables and serving as a primary point-of-contact for attorneys, investigators, and case teams.Primary Responsibilities:* Gather a wide variety of data types from primary and secondary sources through diverse channels using a combination of methods that will be researched and employed by the Data Analytics Management team.* Develop, maintain, and enforce streamlined and efficient processes for project lifecycles, from collection through transformation of data; manage timelines, training, resources, and budgets; and will finalize or assist the Program Manager in the finalization of client deliverables.* Manage the collection, documentation, vetting and onboarding of data, provide direct support to the Data Analytics Engineer team on the database development and set up, and validate the population of data into the appropriate analytical tools.* Must have the ability to guide and assist Junior and Mid-level Data Analytics Solution Analysts as required.* Defining, developing, and communicating data analytics solutions to support the customer.* In this role you will take the lead in working with client case teams to identify their needs and jointly develop solutions through leveraging all available analytic and visualization options through the following:* Corresponding with key stakeholder personnel via regular consultations with clients to elicit requirements and provide regular status updates, performing data analysis and modeling to understand and identify data relationships/trends/classifications/predictions* Building experience in all available analysis and visualization software, proposing reporting solutions that best present the information to their supervisor.* Providing regular status updates to the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst - Senior regarding assigned tasks.* Ensuring successful completion of work, timeliness of deliverables, and quality control.* Delivering the completed solution.Required Qualifications:* Bachelor's degree or equivalent* Minimum of 7 years of experience using analytics tools, methods, and visualization software.* Significant experience in one or more of the following tools is required: Tableau Software; IBM I2/EIA; IBM Analyst Notebook; Database (SQL Server, Teradata, Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL); Programming and/or scripting (Python, R, Java); Natural Language Processing; Aster, Neo4j, or other graph databases; Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud environment; and Other analytic and visualization tools.* Strong SQL experience is required. Deep understanding of database, ETL, and analytics tools and concepts.* Background in Law Enforcement, Data Science, Investigation, Data Analysis, Computer Information Systems, or Statistics.* Experience working in AWS or other cloud environments.* Experience supporting federal agencies. Industry analytics/business intelligence knowledge including current industry trends, challenges, and data quality approaches. Must be able to work independently and prioritize work effectively, as well as to function as an effective team member in a local and virtual team development environment.Desired Qualifications:* The candidate should take the initiative to attack new challenges and learn new skills independently.* Must be well organized and flexible.* Interested in a diverse skillset in data analytics and has current skills in either data analysis, litigation support, statistical software, analytic programming languages (Python, R, Java, SAS), visualization software, or database management.What you can expect from us:* Real opportunity for career growth in an environment where your achievements will be celebrated* Constant collaboration with numerous teams to ensure client success* A team that respects and embraces your ideas and expertise* Coworkers that are motivated by pursuing excellence, rather than the prospect of personal gain* A workplace dedicated to supporting and bettering public safety and government agenciesBenefits:* Very competitive salary based on qualifications and experience* Comprehensive, Company paid United Health Care Medical for you and your family (We pay your premiums and deductibles)* 401(k) & 4% matching* Travel & performance incentives* 3 weeks paid time off (plus Federal Holidays)* $5K annual training allowance* $500 book allowance* Tuition reimbursement programPraescient Analytics is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all. Employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, gender identity, national origin, legally protected physical or mental disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or status in the uniformed services of the United States, status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era, or on any other basis which is protected under applicable law. This includes a commitment to provide a work environment that is free from all forms of illegal harassment including sexual harassment.This covers all terms and conditions of employment including (but not limited to):* Hiring, placement, promotion, transfer, or demotion of all job classifications;* Recruiting, advertising or solicitation for employment;* Treatment during employment;* Rates of pay or other forms of compensation;* Benefits;* Selection for training;* Company sponsored social and recreational activities; and* Layoff or terminationApplicants selected will be subject to a government security investigation and must meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information.US Citizenship RequiredPraescient Analytics is an Equal Opportunity Employer.Interested Candidates: Please forward your resume to recruiting@praescientanalytics.com and please visit our website to apply online at www.praescientanalytics.applicantstack.com/x/opening,Praescient Analytics, LLC (Praescient) is a Veteran-led, certified Woman-Owned Small Business (WOSB) founded in 2011 that specializes in implementing advanced analytics solutions across the defense, intelligence, and law enforcement communities. With over 40 contracts across 6 continents, over 70% of our employees are veterans and or have intel/law enforcement experience. We fully understand the unique challenges of our clients and work to identify, vet, implement, and enhance commercial and proprietary technologies to provide full scope solutions, because we have been there. Praescient has extensive experience designing, developing, and integrating solutions for customers including the US Army, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), US Navy (USN), US Marine Corps (USMC), US Coast Guard (USCG), Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), intelligence community, and local law enforcement agencies, among others. The U.S. Attorney's Office and its investigative partners encounter urgent and complex investigative needs when investigating federal crimes or prosecuting civil cases. The standard IT systems made available through EOUSA are not designed to adequately support the data analytics needed to best advance these cases. The U.S. Attorney's Office requires access to a sophisticated, user-friendly, off the shelf analytics software package easily accessible from any user's government-furnished computer, or by agency partners via the internet. The government employees will be Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs), paralegals, analysts, and agents. They will be supported by on-site contractors. The criminal cases requiring data analytics include nearly every area of a case in the Office; violent crime, terrorism, public corruption, cybercrime, and narcotics trafficking, just to name a few. The civil cases include data-intensive areas such as opioid diversion and mortgage fraud. The challenges faced in our cases include, but are not limited to determining the scope of criminal activity involved in the scheme and the specific intent of illegal and/or foreign organizations and senior corporate officers who intentionally violate criminal statutes, financial institution and money laundering statutes, or pose a threat to the national security, foreign policy, or the economy of the United States. As such, the U.S. Attorney's Office requires sophisticated and specialized data analytic tools and support to load, organize, assimilate, and summarize large amounts of data, both structured and unstructured, and information related to major criminal investigations of corrupt public figures, cybercriminals, violent gangs, white-collar fraudsters, opioid traffickers, other targets actively pursued by our Civil Frauds unit who are engaged in systematic frauds perpetrated upon government agencies. Praescient Analytics is in search of a Senior Data Analytics Solutions Analyst to provide support for projects related to investigations and litigation cases. This includes managing projects from initiation to closure, developing deliverables and serving as a primary point-of-contact for attorneys, investigators, and case teams. Primary Responsibilities: * Gather a wide variety of data types from primary and secondary sources through diverse channels using a combination of methods that will be researched and employed by the Data Analytics Management team. * Develop, maintain, and enforce streamlined and efficient processes for project lifecycles, from collection through transformation of data; manage timelines, training, resources, and budgets; and will finalize or assist the Program Manager in the finalization of client deliverables. * Manage the collection, documentation, vetting and onboarding of data, provide direct support to the Data Analytics Engineer team on the database development and set up, and validate the population of data into the appropriate analytical tools. * Must have the ability to guide and assist Junior and Mid-level Data Analytics Solution Analysts as required. * Defining, developing, and communicating data analytics solutions to support the customer. * In this role you will take the lead in working with client case teams to identify their needs and jointly develop solutions through leveraging all available analytic and visualization options through the following: * Corresponding with key stakeholder personnel via regular consultations with clients to elicit requirements and provide regular status updates, performing data analysis and modeling to understand and identify data relationships/trends/classifications/predictions * Building experience in all available analysis and visualization software, proposing reporting solutions that best present the information to their supervisor. * Providing regular status updates to the Data Analytics Solutions Analyst - Senior regarding assigned tasks. * Ensuring successful completion of work, timeliness of deliverables, and quality control. * Delivering the completed solution. Required Qualifications: * Bachelor's degree or equivalent * Minimum of 7 years of experience using analytics tools, methods, and visualization software. * Significant experience in one or more of the following tools is required: Tableau Software; IBM I2/EIA; IBM Analyst Notebook; Database (SQL Server, Teradata, Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL); Programming and/or scripting (Python, R, Java); Natural Language Processing; Aster, Neo4j, or other graph databases; Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud environment; and Other analytic and visualization tools. * Strong SQL experience is required. Deep understanding of database, ETL, and analytics tools and concepts. * Background in Law Enforcement, Data Science, Investigation, Data Analysis, Computer Information Systems, or Statistics. * Experience working in AWS or other cloud environments. * Experience supporting federal agencies. Industry analytics/business intelligence knowledge including current industry trends, challenges, and data quality approaches. Must be able to work independently and prioritize work effectively, as well as to function as an effective team member in a local and virtual team development environment. Desired Qualifications: * The candidate should take the initiative to attack new challenges and learn new skills independently. * Must be well organized and flexible. * Interested in a diverse skillset in data analytics and has current skills in either data analysis, litigation support, statistical software, analytic programming languages (Python, R, Java, SAS), visualization software, or database management. What you can expect from us: * Real opportunity for career growth in an environment where your achievements will be celebrated * Constant collaboration with numerous teams to ensure client success * A team that respects and embraces your ideas and expertise * Coworkers that are motivated by pursuing excellence, rather than the prospect of personal gain * A workplace dedicated to supporting and bettering public safety and government agencies Benefits: * Very competitive salary based on qualifications and experience * Comprehensive, Company paid United Health Care Medical for you and your family (We pay your premiums and deductibles) * 401(k) & 4% matching * Travel & performance incentives * 3 weeks paid time off (plus Federal Holidays) * $5K annual training allowance * $500 book allowance * Tuition reimbursement program Praescient Analytics is committed to providing equal employment opportunities for all. Employees and applicants without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, gender identity, national origin, legally protected physical or mental disability, genetic information, citizenship status, or status in the uniformed services of the United States, status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era, or on any other basis which is protected under applicable law. This includes a commitment to provide a work environment that is free from all forms of illegal harassment including sexual harassment. This covers all terms and conditions of employment including (but not limited to): * Hiring, placement, promotion, transfer, or demotion of all job classifications; * Recruiting, advertising or solicitation for employment; * Treatment during employment; * Rates of pay or other forms of compensation; * Benefits; * Selection for training; * Company sponsored social and recreational activities; and * Layoff or termination Applicants selected will be subject to a government security investigation and must meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information. US Citizenship Required Praescient Analytics is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Interested Candidates: Please forward your resume to and please visit our website to apply online at www.praescientanalytics.applicantstack.com/x/opening,Job Description
Hello,

My name is Paul Joseph and I am a Senior Technical Recruiter with ACT Consulting. We have an urgent contract opening for a Master Data Analyst with our direct client located in Parsippany, NJ

ACT Consulting is a U.S. owned and operated staffing company providing our clients with candidates on a national basis for contract, contract to hire, and direct hire engagements. Our clients are comprised mostly of Fortune 1000 companies, primarily in the areas of Information Technology, Engineering, Professional, Accounting and Finance

Job Title- Master Data Analyst

Location - Parsippany, NJ (zip code 07054)

Duration - 6 + Months contract

Description:

The Master Data Analyst will play a key role in bridging the gap between finance and technology, ensuring the accuracy of information derived from our financial systems, and identifying process improvement opportunities within Finance. Success in this role will require effective communication skills, innovative thinking, and a passion for delivering results.

Responsibilities
• Support Master Data Management processing and validations for Items, Customers, Pricing, Discounts
• Support 1Worldsync data processing
• Support accurate and effective master data including data maintenance, analysis, audits, data reconciliation, maintenance support, documentation, reporting, and communication
• Conduct or support mass update program runs
• Support synchronization of master data across multiple systems
• Support internal controls and audit information requests
• Anticipate problems, identify root causes, and be proactive about preventing issues from occurring
• Analyze full impact and identify risks associated with potential solutions to systems issues, and advise process owners of the best approach
• Primary functional support for Global data standards and management hierarchy maintenance
• Participate in software upgrades, design, implementation, functional testing, and data validation to ensure quality solutions
• Ability to detect issues/inefficiencies and provide innovative and effective solutions
• Ability to automate processes

Qualifications
• BS/MA Degree in Accounting, Finance or Information Systems
• 2-5 years of experience within Finance or MIS in CPG industry with focus on Master Data management
• Extensive Excel skills and knowledge of other MS Office applications (i.e. Word, PowerPoint, Visio, Access, etc.) required
• Must be self-directed and effective working independently and in a team environment
• Demonstrate an analytical, methodical, and creative approach to resolving issues
• Ability to multi-task and prioritize assignments, and adapt quickly to evolving business needs, while continually meeting deadlines
• Strong written and oral communication skills

Other
• Candidate MUST have experience with Master Data Management and Data Cleansing
• The role will function primarily as administrative support. The candidate will provide pricing on items for customers, determine which brand products belong to in the system, synchronize data, etc.

--

Thanks & Regards

Paul Joseph

ACT Consulting

Talent Acquisition Lead

Phone: 860-924-1755

Fax: 860-371-2177

paul@act-info.com

Visit ACT Consulting at

http://www.act-info.com/careerportal/#/jobs or

www.act-info.com to view our open positions.

Join our Talent Network

Powered by JazzHR

VbhnHtEtaP,Suntechpros Inc. has an immediate requirement for Data Analyst in Salt Lake City,UT.Please send me your profile to nidhig@suntechpros.com.**It's a w2 contract position and we can offer sponsorship for this position**
*Locals are preferred and must have AWS experience and certification**
*Must have Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop **
Job Description:

5+ years of associated work experience
Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses & BI systems
Experience with big data and analytical technologies
Experience Cloud Architecture and services
Experience with Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop
Experience with AWS and must have certification
Detailed analytical abilities
Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills,Data Engineer Data Analyst Saltlake City, UT Contract W2 This is a data engineering role that must have AWS experience - aws certs are highly preferable Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop etc too. The Senior Data Analyst will work with partners from all business units and other partners to define and detail data reporting requirements for UID initiative. The Analyst evaluates and validates new and existing functions, identifies and analyzes end-user issues and provides support through standardized processes, tools, workflow analysis and testing to ensure end-user requirements are fulfilled. 5+ years of associated work experience Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses BI systems Knowledge of big data and analytical technologies Knowledge of Cloud Architecture and services Detailed analytical abilities Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills The Skills You Bring Your advanced working SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases and data warehouses Your knowledge of Data Lake and Big Data Architectures Your advanced working experience in data analysis, requirement analysis, test case development and technical specifications development Your experience with data normalization and denormalization techniques Your background building processes supporting data transformation, data structures, metadata, dependency and workload management. Your background supporting and working with multi-functional teams in a dynamic environment. Thanks Regards Jayshri Raghav (Jessica) Phone 248 473 0720 183 Email Id Jayshrihclglobal.com mailtoJayshrihclglobal.com,Note - Temporary back-fill (3-4 months)

Special Operations Forces (SOF) Language, Regional Expertise, and Culture Instruction (LREC) Incentives and Proficiency Data Analyst

Summary:

The Analyst will support the database and Foreign Language Proficiency Bonus (FLPB) task, this includes input and query the Special Operations Foreign Language Office (SOFLO) database in order to assess and analyze language training database statistics; thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the unit Language Training Program. The Analyst will collect and synchronize all data and databases from subordinate units for the purpose of conducting consolidated analysis and compiling required reports. The Analyst will manage the FLPB Program for the unit, IAW Service and organizational policy. The Analyst will develop new and improve current procedures as needed. The Analyst contractor shall be responsible for managing all paperwork and procedures to assist the unit change Control Languages for applicable SOF personnel through Service processes.

Specific duties may include:
Assess and analyze Special Operations Foreign Language Office (SOFLO) database statistics to enhance the effectiveness of the 1st SFC LREC Training Program.
Collect and synchronize all data and databases from subordinate commands.
Manage the 1st SFC Foreign Language Proficiency Bonus (FLPB) Program.
Manage paperwork and procedures to assist 1st SFC to change Control Languages for all assigned Special Forces, Civil Affairs, and Military Information Support Soldiers through Human Resources Command (HRC).
Understand and apply all relevant Service and local policies as effect incentives and language testing. Draft changes to policy to better support 1st SFC.
Draft and review documentation, provide corrections and provide recommended corrections.
Compile data as required, prepare reports, and create presentations suitable for senior audiences (military grades O6 to O8).
Required Qualifications:
High school graduate or possess a GED
at least 2-years’ experience working on military pay or personnel issues
Proficient in the use all current Microsoft Office applications and SharePoint
Experience performing tasks listed above
Desired Experience:
Ability to interact on a professional level with administration, faculty, students, and all personnel.
Effective use of diplomacy, tact, and judgment.
Ability to work well independently; demonstrated creativity, self-discipline, and organization; and ability to search and understand new technologies and their potential
Clearance:

Secret clearance is required upon entry into position

Location:

(1); Camp Williams, UT (1),Must be a US Citizen who currently possesses a Secret Clearance. (NATO Secret is preferred)

Tasking
The Contractor shall contribute to the development of new deliverables and urging emerging work stands; and ensure the dissemination of the resulting products.
The Contractor will support the aforementioned, with focus on the following:
Technical expertise in Branch regarding the application of data science and analytics to strategic alternatives. Leverages various statistical techniques to identify patterns within large data sets to make predictions and enterprise- oriented suggestions. Utilizes predictive modeling to increase and optimize the effects of Warfare Development.
Strategies to identify patterns within large data sets, make predictions based on data science, and provide corresponding recommendations to senior leadership. Simplifies and communicates key findings and insights to senior leadership and draws implications for work organization-wide.
Predictions based on data science. This line of effort consists of working alongside key stakeholders across NATO to develop and execute data- science strategies over the long-term. This includes both strategies for data science, e.g., how to scale the use of data science in support of every level of decision-making) and strategies informed by data science, e.g., the use of data science to support the development and translation of policy between NATO HQ and the NATO Command Structure.
Metrics that improve NATO's ability to assess effects in the mid- to long- term horizon. Doing so includes the development of comprehensive analytical and mapping capabilities to identify or predict relevant, feasible, and potential challenges and opportunities to NATO and partners.
Performs other job related duties as requested.
In addition to the aforementioned, the completion of the following tasks is also required to support partnership-related efforts at HQ SACT. The Contractor must be granted base access and possess a NATO SECRET clearance to complete all of the requirements:
Analyze emerging trends throughout the international system.
Produce point papers, documents, briefings and final reports with a high degree of proficiency and efficiency as directed by established deadline.
Support the implementation of findings and in ACT programs of work and, where appropriate, liaise with other NATO bodies.
Populate, update and administrate the digital library.
Provide support to the team for conferences and other events.
Fulfill further specific tasks directed by the Branch Head or the COTR in support of SPP collaborative efforts and other partnership related work strands.
Professional Qualifications and Personal Attributes
a. Professional experience in the area international relations and security studies.
b. M.A. degree in a data science or related field.
c. Four years (within the last seven years) experience conducting predictive analytics using data science (big data) and providing advice on relevant issues in the field of data science.
d. Demonstrate experience in preparation and development of FOGO or civilian equivalent briefings, background papers, reports, and speeches.
e. Valid NATO SECRET security clearance or national equivalent with NATO eligibility.
f. Demonstrable proficiency in English Language
g. Be able to use contemporary office tools, including MS Office.

Must be local to Norfolk Area,Job Number: R0079223 Business Intelligence/Data Analyst
Key Role: Support the development of data interfaces providing situational awareness, operational intelligence and newfound insight for Navy networks. Conceptualize and create performance metrics, interactive analytics, dashboards, dynamic visualizations, Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), scorecards and automated reports by transforming data into information for decision makers. Employ business intelligence applications such as SAP Business Intelligence 3.1 or 4.2, Enterprise, Client, and Fiori App, Lumira, Tableau, Splunk, Power BI, or R. Leverage scripting programs such as Visual Basic, Python, HTML and JavaScript to support interface development, where necessary. Analyze metric requirements, visualization capabilities and data availability to determine appropriateness, feasibility and level of effort to develop new products or improve existing products. Apply knowledge of data analysis, data integration, and data mining to ensure the accuracy and integrity of all published metrics, visualizations and reports. Collaborate with data requestors to ensure requirements are met, products are developed in a timely manner, and iterative feedback loops promote implementation of customer comments and suggestions. Basic Qualifications: * 2+ years experience with visualization and BI development principles, concepts, methods, standards and practices * 1+ years of experience with using widely recognized BI applications, including SAP Business Intelligence (BI) Enterprise Development 3.1 or 4.2, Lumira Designer, Tableau, Web Intelligence reporting (WEBI) , Business Intelligence Launch Pad/Central Management Console (CMC), or Information Design Tool (IDT) * Experience with employing multiple technologies, tools, and programming languages, as appropriate * Experience with developing user interfaces or dashboards which include metrics, filters, charts, graphs, and tables * Experience with s cripting programs, including Visual Basic, Python, HTML, and JavaScript * Experience with Microsoft Office Suite * Ability to work through complex problems to solve business processes or system enhancements or automation * Active Secret clearance * HS diploma or GED Additional Qualifications: * Experience with building user interfaces in Tableau * Knowledge of DoD, Secretary of the Navy, and Department of the Navy security practices, policies, and objectives * Experience with DevOps and Agile/Scrum * Experience with development using Big Data technologies and applying statistical packages, including Sci-Kit Learn, Pandas, and R * BS degree in Science, Technology, Engineering, or Mathematics * Certified Business Intelligence Professional (CBIP) certification with a concentration in Analytics Development * Security + certification * ITIL v3 or 4 Foundations certification Clearance:
Applicants selected will be subject to a security investigation and may need to meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information; Secret clearance is required. We're an EOE that empowers our people-no matter their race, color, religion, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other protected characteristic-to fearlessly drive change.,Senior Data Analyst- Secret Clearance- Norfolk- VA

CTS is comprised of individuals with a passion for delivering superior service and innovative solutions.
Our team bringsexceptional understanding of our client's challenges anda wide variety of financial, business, management and technical services to our customers in support of specialized intelligence, defense, and businessmissions
CTS brings a unique level of expertise to its customers. Our team has decades of direct mission engagement within the IC and DOD as well as broad expertise in commercial and private sector disciplines.
Named one of "Best Places to Work in 2020" by the Washington Business Journal, Counter Threat Solutions (CTS) is a Woman-Owned Service-Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business providing professional and technical solutions to clients in the Intelligence Community (IC) and beyond.

We invest in our people! Check out our 5-Star Glassdoor reviews and compare our full paid health care, PTO, 401K, and annual continuing education allowance with your current situation!

We seek ambitious Senior Data Analyst professionals with Secret Clearance for challenging opportunities in Norfolk VA.

Day/Core Hours

Cleared candidates at any skill level are encouraged to apply.

Skills required to be Successful:

Counter Threat Solutions is currently seeking a Senior Data Analyst with strong data visualization skills for an opportunity with the Department of Defense in Norfolk, VA.
Data Analysis ability to develop reports, dashboards, utilizing one or more of the following: Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Access, IBM Cognos, or Tableau.
Compliance and Process Automation ensuring that required services are delivered to the client by building, tracking and reporting on various financial metrics.
Process Improvement working with the client to identify processes that could be improved and build new tools to streamline contract compliance within the command.
Organize and integrate data from a variety of sources for use in reports drawing on multiple data sets.
Problem solving, quantitative and analytical abilities.
Experience with data visualization, developing data analysis workflows, and streamlining data set development.
Multiple positions may be hired from this announcement.

What we are looking for:
BA/BS degree with 3+ years of experience.
Experience managing data sets with multiple data types for analysis.
Experience using Microsoft Access to include creating reports, forms, and queries.
Ability to multi-task in a fast-paced environment in support of client requirements.
Outstanding written and verbal communication skills.
Availability: 2 weeks.
Current, active Secret Level Security Clearance.
Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the United States on a full-time basis. CTS will not sponsor applicants for work visas for this position.
Experience in one or more of the following areas: PPBE cycle; budget formulation, execution and/or financial management, particularly in a DoD organization.
Experience using the Navy Working Capital Fund.
Experience using CFMS-C and its Business Intelligence.
Experience using STARS or SABRS.
Experience using the Navy Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System.
Experience using Microsoft Excel including VBA.
Experience with Excel's Power Query and Power Pivot or Power BI.
Experience with Tableau.
This is not an exhaustive description of this opportunity. Let's have a talk!

About Counter Threat Solutions (CTS):CTS is a Woman-Owned Service- Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business (SDVOSB) consultancy to the Federal government with a focus on the Intelligence and Defense communities. We provide mission-savvy subject matter experts and deliver innovative solutions to our clients. As such, we seek people passionate about their career specialty and we reward our team members with competitive pay and a comprehensive benefits package that includes 100% paid medical, dental and vision care premiums; a retirement plan with companymatch and immediate vesting; a generous annual training/tuition allowance; 6 weeks total paid time off; and performance-based merit increases and incentives.

Counter Threat Solutions is an equal opportunity employer and will not discriminate against any employee or applicanton the basis ofage, color, disability, sex, national origin, race, religion,sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran status, or any classification protected by federal, state, or local law.,We are seeking Data Analysts to provide support to a US Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) customer to integrate as part of a team that will provide advanced analytical knowledge of data, with a focus on conducting big data analysis, data conditioning, programming advanced computing, developing algorithms, developing software and data models, executing predictive analytics and utilizing visualization tools. This team will provide support to the J2 and J8 Directorates.
Responsibilities • Use technology to mine complex, voluminous, and different varieties of data from various sources and platforms in order to collect, analyze, and compile data to meet customer needs
• Identify new sources of data and methods to improve data collection, analysis, and reporting
• Collect customer requirements
• Determine technical issues
• Design algorithms and data manipulation capabilities using R, Python, C++, JavaScript, Go, and other known programming languages
• Build data solutions, tools, and capabilities to enable self-service frameworks for data consumers to monitor and report on data
• Improve the quality of data use and usability by driving an understanding and adherence to the principles of data quality management including metadata, lineage, and business definitions
• Work collaboratively with Intelligence and Data analysis teams to produce qualitative and quantitative data that support Intelligence products.
Qualifications
• Possess a minimum of a bachelor's degree in a computer science discipline.
• Experience providing services similar in required tasks, scope, and complexity. • Current DoD Top Secret clearance and eligible for SCI access and ACCM read-on.,Configuration and Data Management (C&DM) Analyst
Site


Hampton, VA

Employment duration


Full-Time

Job Category


Administrative

Apply Now

Job Brief


The successful applicant will support of the Technology, Engineering and Aerospace Mission Support (TEAMS 3) Contract at NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia.

Analytical Mechanics Associates, Inc., (AMA) is proud of our customer relationships, our diverse and dynamic work environment, and our employees' career satisfaction. AMA is a small business specializing in aerospace engineering, business analytics, information technology, and visualization solutions. AMA combines the best of engineering and mathematics capabilities with the latest in information technologies and visualization to build creative solutions. Headquartered in Hampton, VA, AMA has operations in Huntsville, AL; Dallas and Houston, TX; Denver, CO; Santa Clara and Mountain View, CA; and Edwards Air Force Base, CA. We offer a competitive salary and attractive benefits package, including paid personal leave and holidays, salary deferrals into a 401(k) matching plan with immediate vesting, tuition reimbursement, short/long term disability plans, medical, dental, and vision insurance. Our website (www.ama-inc.com) describes our corporate values and how they apply to the professional success and growth of our employees

Job Description

The successful applicant will support of the Technology, Engineering and Aerospace Mission Support (TEAMS 3) Contract at NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. The position involves working with technical and business personnel at NASA, other Government Agencies and private industry to provide critical project management support on assigned projects.

A successful candidate will be responsible for managing project data through the project life cycle.

Requirements
Identifying, controlling, accounting for and verifying project information.
Evaluate the C&DM needs of programs/projects and provide resources and guidance to meet those needs.
Develop and maintain plans to implement C&DM requirements.
Work with project management to establish processes and procedures to meet NASA C&DM requirements
Identify configuration items to be controlled for each project, track and coordinate the controlled items.
Manage the process for developing and controlling product configuration information.
Establishing and maintaining the project repository by controlling access to sensitive information and ensuring latest revisions are uploaded to the system in a timely manner.
Provide training and assistance to project team members on the project repository.
Establishing and maintaining project document lists and document trees.
Coordinating project configuration control board activities and recording the resulting minutes and action items.
Support design reviews and conduct configuration audits.
Reviewing contractor configuration and data management plans to ensure compliance.
Coordinating all project document releases; Coordinating and preparing data to support major project reviews and providing templates for documents and presentations.
Tracking action items for project reviews and technical interchange meetings and maintaining the action item database and metrics.
Participate in creating processes and continuous process improvement.
Providing monthly configuration and data management reports and metrics for each project.
Participate in multifunctional efforts to develop and improve C&DM processes.
Manage deliverable data products required by customer contracts and supplier subcontracts.
Relevant Experience
Bachelor’s Degree with a minimum of 5 years of configuration and data management or related experience.
NASA experience, CM Certification, and understanding of ANSI/EIA 649 are a plus.
Excellent communication and presentation skills are vital, as this position is a key interface between several groups.
Strong organizational skills; a critical eye for detail; excellent interpersonal skills; and an ability to manage and control a large number of internal and external documents.
Candidate must be proactive, self-motivated and capable of working independently and in a team atmosphere.
Experience with Xerox Docushare and Microsoft SharePoint
Some travel will be required.
U.S. citizenship is mandatory.

AMA is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer and does not discriminate against any applicant for employment or employee because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic prohibited under Federal, State, or local laws.,Acoustics Data Analyst/Flight Test Engineer
Site


Hampton, VA

Employment duration


Full-Time

Job Category


Engineering

Apply Now

Job Brief


AMA is in need of a full-time Acoustic and Rotorcraft Flight Test Data Analyst to support our team under the TEAMS 3 contract at NASA Langley Research Center.

Analytical Mechanics Associates, Inc., (AMA) is proud of our customer relationships, our diverse and dynamic work environment, and our employees' career satisfaction. AMA is a small business specializing in aerospace engineering, business analytics, information technology, and visualization solutions. AMA combines the best of engineering and mathematics capabilities with the latest in information technologies and visualization to build creative solutions. Headquartered in Hampton, VA, AMA has operations in Huntsville, AL; Dallas and Houston, TX; Denver, CO; Santa Clara and Mountain View, CA; and Edwards Air Force Base, CA. We offer a competitive salary and attractive benefits package, including paid personal leave and holidays, salary deferrals into a 401(k) matching plan with immediate vesting, tuition reimbursement, short/long term disability plans, medical, dental, and vision insurance. Our website (www.ama-inc.com) describes our corporate values and how they apply to the professional success and growth of our employees.

Job Description

AMA is in need of a full-time Acoustic and Rotorcraft Flight Test Data Analyst to support our team under the TEAMS 3 contract at NASA Langley Research Center. The candidate will have knowledge and experience in the field of acoustic data acquisition, data analysis, and experimental data documentation. Incumbent will assist in preparation and on-site acoustic data analysis during flight tests; documentation of flight test activities including data reduction and quality checks; and developing novel acoustic data analysis for future vehicle concepts

Technical Skills

Proficient in mathematical computer programming; preferably MATLAB and Fortran

Proficient in data acquisition and analysis.

Preference for aeroacoustic knowledge with rotorcraft and vertical lift flight technology acoustic experiments.

Preference to novel data analysis techniques and knowledge of aerodynamic noise sources.

Education and Qualifications

MS degree in Aeronautical Engineering or equivalent.

Strong oral and written communication skills.

Acquire and maintain secret clearance.

Requirements

U.S. Citizenship required.

AMA is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer and does not discriminate against any applicant for employment or employee because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic prohibited under Federal, State, or local laws.,Senior Data Analyst- Secret Clearance- Norfolk- VACTS is comprised of individuals with a passion for delivering superior service and innovative solutions.* Our team brings exceptional understanding of our client's challenges and a wide variety of financial, business, management and technical services to our customers in support of specialized intelligence, defense, and business missions* CTS brings a unique level of expertise to its customers. Our team has decades of direct mission engagement within the IC and DOD as well as broad expertise in commercial and private sector disciplines.Named one of "Best Places to Work in 2020" by the Washington Business Journal, Counter Threat Solutions (CTS) is a Woman-Owned Service-Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business providing professional and technical solutions to clients in the Intelligence Community (IC) and beyond.We invest in our people! Check out our 5-Star Glassdoor reviews and compare our full paid health care, PTO, 401K, and annual continuing education allowance with your current situation!We seek ambitious Senior Data Analyst professionals with Secret Clearance for challenging opportunities in Norfolk VA.Day/Core HoursCleared candidates at any skill level are encouraged to apply.Skills required to be Successful:Counter Threat Solutions is currently seeking a Senior Data Analyst with strong data visualization skills for an opportunity with the Department of Defense in Norfolk, VA.* Data Analysis ability to develop reports, dashboards, utilizing one or more of the following: Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Access, IBM Cognos, or Tableau.* Compliance and Process Automation ensuring that required services are delivered to the client by building, tracking and reporting on various financial metrics.* Process Improvement working with the client to identify processes that could be improved and build new tools to streamline contract compliance within the command.* Organize and integrate data from a variety of sources for use in reports drawing on multiple data sets.* Problem solving, quantitative and analytical abilities.* Experience with data visualization, developing data analysis workflows, and streamlining data set development.Multiple positions may be hired from this announcement.What we are looking for:* BA/BS degree with 3+ years of experience.* Experience managing data sets with multiple data types for analysis.* Experience using Microsoft Access to include creating reports, forms, and queries.* Ability to multi-task in a fast-paced environment in support of client requirements.* Outstanding written and verbal communication skills.* Availability: 2 weeks.* Current, active Secret Level Security Clearance.* Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the United States on a full-time basis. CTS will not sponsor applicants for work visas for this position.* Experience in one or more of the following areas: PPBE cycle; budget formulation, execution and/or financial management, particularly in a DoD organization.* Experience using the Navy Working Capital Fund.* Experience using CFMS-C and its Business Intelligence.* Experience using STARS or SABRS.* Experience using the Navy Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System.* Experience using Microsoft Excel including VBA.* Experience with Excel's Power Query and Power Pivot or Power BI.* Experience with Tableau.This is not an exhaustive description of this opportunity. Let's have a talk!About Counter Threat Solutions (CTS): CTS is a Woman-Owned Service- Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business (SDVOSB) consultancy to the Federal government with a focus on the Intelligence and Defense communities. We provide mission-savvy subject matter experts and deliver innovative solutions to our clients. As such, we seek people passionate about their career specialty and we reward our team members with competitive pay and a comprehensive benefits package that includes 100% paid medical, dental and vision care premiums; a retirement plan with company match and immediate vesting; a generous annual training/tuition allowance; 6 weeks total paid time off; and performance-based merit increases and incentives.Counter Threat Solutions is an equal opportunity employer and will not discriminate against any employee or applicant on the basis of age, color, disability, sex, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran status, or any classification protected by federal, state, or local law.,OverviewGuidehouse is a leading management consulting firm serving the public and commercial markets. We guide our clients forward towards new futures that build trust in society and your professional skills along the journey. Join us at Guidehouse.ResponsibilitiesOur Data Analytics Senior Consultants will assist with the strategy and development of an analytics capability and function within a mission-oriented organization. Conduct data analysis at all phases, including, but not limited to, identifying business questions and goals, design analytic approach, data collection and exploration, and interpreting and communicating results. Utilize statistical analysis and data visualization to support data-driven decisions and objectives. QualificationsSkills Required:Demonstrates thorough skills and/or proven success in a role participating in projects including the following:+ Effective communication to various audiences (including various levels of management and external clients) in a professional environment+ Strong organization and self-management skills, willing to take initiative and follow through;+ Ability to handle multiple tasks and responsibilities+ Willingness and ability to train and lead+ Contributing as a team member: understanding personal and team roles, contributing to a positive working environment by building solid relationships with team members+ Ability to work effectively with a variety of skill sets to tackle complex challenges+ MUST possess an ACTIVE or INTERIM Secret clearance.Minimum Degree Required: Bachelor's degree in Economics, Statistics, Operations Research, Computer Science, Information Systems, Engineering or similar quantitative disciplineKnowledge Preferred:Demonstrates thorough knowledge of, and proven success with a role, executing various aspects of the business or information technology-related client engagements and/or projects within a professional services environment, including knowledge of an industry or functional domain and expertise in at least two of the following areas:+ Statistical Analysis and Techniques;+ Business and Operations Analysis within marketing, operations, or risk analysis using quantitative techniques.Desired:+ DoN experience in Business Operations and Processes. + Automation development experience+ Business process analysis and optimization+ Gathering requirements and process mapping+ Experience with Agile project delivery methods, tools and conceptsAdditional Requirements+ The successful candidate must not be subject to employment restrictions from a former employer (such as a non-compete) that would prevent the candidate from performing the job responsibilities as described.DisclaimerAbout GuidehouseGuidehouse is an Equal Employment Opportunity / Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, national origin, ancestry, citizenship status, military status, protected veteran status, religion, creed, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression, age, genetic information, or any other basis protected by law, ordinance, or regulation.Guidehouse will consider for employment qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law or ordinance including the Fair Chance Ordinance of Los Angeles and San Francisco.If you have visited our website for information about employment opportunities, or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation, please contact Guidehouse Recruiting at 1-571-633-1711 or via email at RecruitingAccommodation@guidehouse.com. All information you provide will be kept confidential and will be used only to the extent required to provide needed reasonable accommodation.Guidehouse does not accept unsolicited resumes through or from search firms or staffing agencies. All unsolicited resumes will be considered the property of Guidehouse and Guidehouse will not be obligated to pay a placement fee.Rewards and BenefitsGuidehouse offers a comprehensive, total rewards package that includes competitive compensation and a flexible benefits package that reflects our commitment to creating a diverse and supportive workplace.Benefits include:Medical, Rx, Dental & Vision InsurancePersonal and Family Sick Time & Company Paid HolidaysParental Leave and Adoption Assistance401(k) Retirement PlanBasic Life & Supplemental LifeHealth Savings Account, Dental/Vision & Dependent Care Flexible Spending AccountsShort-Term & Long-Term DisabilityTuition Reimbursement, Personal Development & Learning OpportunitiesSkills Development & CertificationsEmployee Referral ProgramCorporate Sponsored Events & Community OutreachEmergency Back-Up Childcare Program,aXseum, Inc. seeks a Full-Time Data Warehouse Programmer/Analyst in Herndon, VA or Newport News, VA to support a military training systems project.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
Develop conversion and system implementation plans.
Interact and collaborate effectively with internal and external team members to assure needs of the project are met.
Develop reports using a reporting tool.
Utilize Agile and SAFe principles and work with analysts to write/elicit Epics and decomposing them into User Stories sized appropriately and creating acceptance test criteria for each user story.
Participate in the following meetings: Program Increment, Daily Stand-Up, Iteration Reviews, Retrospective and Backlog Refinement.
Develop BI reports and dashboards.
Adhere to development, maintenance, and system standards.
Acquire and enhance technology expertise, maintaining thorough knowledge of evolving systems programming and analysis and database technology.
May perform related duties as assigned.
Required Knowledge, Skills and Abilities:
Strong organizational skills with the ability to multi-task and operate in a fast paced, demanding environment.
Good communication and customer service skills.
Must be self-motivated with the ability to take appropriate actions with little to no direction.
Minimum Education and Experience:
Minimum Bachelors degree is required, higher level degree is preferred.
Eight (8) to ten (10) years of related experience with a Bachelors is required. Six (6) to eight (8) years of related work experience with a Masters degree, or three (3) to five (5) years with a PHD is also acceptable.
Demonstrated work experience with MS Power BI, OBIEE, Hyperion, or other BI/reporting tools.
Experience with relational databases.
SQL experience.
Must be a U.S. Citizen.
Must have a Secret Clearance or to the ability to obtain and hold a Secret Clearance.
aXseum Inc. and its subcontractors shall abide by the requirements of 41CFR 60-1.4(a), 60-300.5(a) and 60-741.5(a). These regulations prohibit discrimination against qualified individuals based on their status as protected veterans or individuals with disabilities, and prohibit discrimination against all individuals based on their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Moreover, these regulations require that covered prime contractors and subcontractors take affirmative action to employ and advance in employment individuals without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, protected veteran status or disability.,Overview Guidehouse is a leading management consulting firm serving the public and commercial markets. We guide our clients forward towards new futures that build trust in society and your professional skills along the journey. Join us at Guidehouse. Responsibilities Our Data Analytics Senior Consultants will assist with the strategy and development of an analytics capability and function within a mission-oriented organization. Conduct data analysis at all phases, including, but not limited to, identifying business questions and goals, design analytic approach, data collection and exploration, and interpreting and communicating results. Utilize statistical analysis and data visualization to support data-driven decisions and objectives. Qualifications Skills Required: Demonstrates thorough skills and/or proven success in a role participating in projects including the following: * Effective communication to various audiences (including various levels of management and external clients) in a professional environment * Strong organization and self-management skills, willing to take initiative and follow through; * Ability to handle multiple tasks and responsibilities * Willingness and ability to train and lead * Contributing as a team member: understanding personal and team roles, contributing to a positive working environment by building solid relationships with team members * Ability to work effectively with a variety of skill sets to tackle complex challenges * MUST possess an ACTIVE or INTERIM Secret clearance. Minimum Degree Required: Bachelor's degree in Economics, Statistics, Operations Research, Computer Science, Information Systems, Engineering or similar quantitative discipline Knowledge Preferred: Demonstrates thorough knowledge of, and proven success with a role, executing various aspects of the business or information technology-related client engagements and/or projects within a professional services environment, including knowledge of an industry or functional domain and expertise in at least two of the following areas: * Statistical Analysis and Techniques; * Business and Operations Analysis within marketing, operations, or risk analysis using quantitative techniques. Desired: * DoN experience in Business Operations and Processes. * Automation development experience * Business process analysis and optimization * Gathering requirements and process mapping * Experience with Agile project delivery methods, tools and concepts Additional Requirements * The successful candidate must not be subject to employment restrictions from a former employer (such as a non-compete) that would prevent the candidate from performing the job responsibilities as described. Disclaimer About Guidehouse Guidehouse is an Equal Employment Opportunity / Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, national origin, ancestry, citizenship status, military status, protected veteran status, religion, creed, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression, age, genetic information, or any other basis protected by law, ordinance, or regulation. Guidehouse will consider for employment qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law or ordinance including the Fair Chance Ordinance of Los Angeles and San Francisco. If you have visited our website for information about employment opportunities, or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation, please contact Guidehouse Recruiting at 1-571-633-1711 or via email at . All information you provide will be kept confidential and will be used only to the extent required to provide needed reasonable accommodation. Guidehouse does not accept unsolicited resumes through or from search firms or staffing agencies. All unsolicited resumes will be considered the property of Guidehouse and Guidehouse will not be obligated to pay a placement fee. Rewards and Benefits Guidehouse offers a comprehensive, total rewards package that includes competitive compensation and a flexible benefits package that reflects our commitment to creating a diverse and supportive workplace. Benefits include: Medical, Rx, Dental & Vision Insurance Personal and Family Sick Time & Company Paid Holidays Parental Leave and Adoption Assistance 401(k) Retirement Plan Basic Life & Supplemental Life Health Savings Account, Dental/Vision & Dependent Care Flexible Spending Accounts Short-Term & Long-Term Disability Tuition Reimbursement, Personal Development & Learning Opportunities Skills Development & Certifications Employee Referral Program Corporate Sponsored Events & Community Outreach Emergency Back-Up Childcare Program,Job Description
We have partnered with a large Mining and Metals company in the Sun Valley, CA area to provide them with a Data Analyst.

Please review the below description and if you are interested please contact:
Vahidin Topcagic at vtopcagic@relevante.biz, 314-853-6670
Responsibilities of the Data Analyst:
Ensures business systems are efficient and operating in supported environments
Proactively reviews the business operations for ongoing process improvements
Works with process owners to document detailed business requirements
Coordinates with IT, consultants and process owners to validate solutions
Analyses processes and dependencies across integrated software applications
Prepares functional documents and technical specifications, RFP's, RFI's, etc.
Recommends new functionality, middleware for ERP, CRM and related applications
Proposes solutions to improve productivity and or save operating capital
Drives development, acceptance testing and subsequent promotion of changes
Prioritizes projects and various change requests in conjunction with management
Coordinates upgrades and data integration efforts with the HRIS users
Proven SQL experience in writing queries and user dashboards in a manufacturing/distribution and/or production environment.
Develops SQL Queries and Smart Views with SQL reporting services
Participates in the back-end maintenance of SQL based applications as needed
Supports point of sale systems and credit card devices for retail operations
Utilizes Microsoft Office (Word, Excel and PowerPoint) to present analysis
Implements Cross-Functional strategy and methods to solve systems issues
Evaluates new functional requests, business impacts and recommends solutions
Works with Quality and Safety teams to ensure process meets all requirements
Coordinates with Infrastructure and Help Desk teams to ensure project readiness
Participates in the Business Continuity Planning design and implementation
Attends and participates in regular planning and staff meetings
Liaison with process owners, application support, end users and customers
Assists the Help Desk in problem resolution for corporate applications
Works closely and assists the Business Systems Manager
May be required to travel to various office branches as needed
Qualifications of the Data Analyst:

The following are the minimum qualifications which an individual requires in order to successfully perform the duties and responsibilities of this position. Please note that the minimum qualifications may vary based upon the department size and/or geographic location.
Driven professional attitude, enthusiastic, self-reliant
Self-motivated, responsible and reliable
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills
Detail oriented with strong analytical and problem-solving skills.
Ability to drive projects from concept to completion
Negotiating skills
Strong sense of ownership of issues
Understands the value of human capital
Requirements of the Data Analyst:

The ideal candidate will have experience with any combination of the following:
Experience with a major ERP system and ……solutions Epicor BisTrack and Microsoft Dynamics GP in a Terminal Server environment
Databases such as Microsoft SQL Server 2014
Nesting applications such as SigmaNEST
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) such as Salesforce
HRIS applications such as Ascentis
Medium to large scale ERP/CRM/HRIS application experience
Experience in the metals industry, supply chain, distribution or retail sales environments
Experience working across multiple geographic locations using video conferencing
Benefits of the Data Analyst:
Health Insurance
Dental Insurance
Life Insurance
401 (k),Data Analyst

Category: Information Systems
Type: Contractor
Description: A leading Third Party Claims Administrator, located in Pittsburgh, PA, is seeking (2) Data Analysts for a 9+ month contract role.

Summary: The Senior Data Analyst position is responsible for MySQL data monitoring, enhancements and improvements deemed warranted by the compliance team and product manager. This role will serve as gatekeeper of the MySQL data and include automating of data conversions and procurement, interpretation and conversion of Medical Bill Review data as required by the needs of the data team.

Responsibilities:
● Application/data monitoring and improvements to enhance efficiency and productivity.
● Automation of data conversions.
● Work with the database assigned product manager and database infrastructure lead to implement changes aimed at efficiency and scalability.
● Procurement, interpretation and documentation of all data applicable to Medical Bill Review. (CMS Pricer, CMS APC, Physician Fee Schedules, Usual and Customary, Pharmaceutical, CPT, ICD9, etc?)
● Knowledge of state, federal and industry standard fee schedules, reimbursement methodologies and regulations, including but not limited to: DRG, ASC, APR-DRG, OPPS and RBRVS
● Populating and/or manipulating data in development, test and production environments.
● Work with software developers to implement changes defined by the State and Federal laws.
● Internal support and assistance to other members of the data team.

Qualifications:
● Knowledge of SQL and related database tools.
● Knowledge of Microsoft Access.
● Ability to work with the software development community.

Experience/Education

Six (6) years of related experience or equivalent combination of education and experience required. Experience in multi-line claims management processes and system requirements strongly preferred.

● Experience working in a relational database environment
● MySQL experience preferred
● Experience in the medical field necessary
● Detail oriented person desired

Location Pittsburgh , PA
Minimum Experience (yrs):
Required Education: Not Specified
Benefits:

Return to search results Email this job to a friend

*Logged in members may also add jobs to their job cart,Qlarant is a not-for-profit corporation that partners with public and private sectors to create high quality, safe, and efficient delivery of health care and human services programs. We have multiple lines of business including population health, utilization review, managed care organization quality review, and quality assurance for programs serving individuals with developmental disabilities. Qlarant is also a national leader in fighting fraud, waste and abuse for large organizations across the country. In addition, our Foundation provides grant opportunities to those with programs for under-served communities.Make a difference! As a Data Analyst working on our Unified Program Integrity Contractors (UPIC) team for the Western Jurisdiction, you can contribute to our efforts to make a positive difference in the future of our nation's healthcare programs. Our UPIC West team identifies and investigates fraud, waste and abuse in the Medicare and Medicaid programs covering 13 states and 3 territories. You will utilize your SAS programming and analytical skills to detect patterns of potential fraud in large healthcare data sets.Our Cerritos, CA office is the preferred location for this position, but we will consider experienced, home-based candidates residing within the UPIC Western jurisdiction (CA, AZ, OR, WA, ID, WY, MT, UT, NV, SD, ND, AK and HI).Our data analysts perform study design, data analysis, and report preparation. Studies originate from preliminary data analysis (trends), literature review, experience and expertise of the team, and mandated projects. Data analysis, including data preparation and presentation of findings is performed in conjunction with other analysts. Reports are drafted by teams with leadership of data Scientists.Essential Duties and Responsibilities:* Trend data to identify potential opportunities (e.g., variances, significant outliers, percentile ranked groups) for quality improvement or focused investigations.* Design data analysis strategies to identify potential areas for quality improvement or focused investigation.* Develop epidemiological sound indicators of the quality of care.* Analyst data and summarize into quality indicator values* Identify external benchmarks of care for comparative purposes.* Develop tabular and graphical presentations of data which clearly and concisely illustrate current levels of care.* Write draft reports which clearly and concisely illustrate current levels or care.* Contribute to the development of interventions (i.e., develop educational materials for doctors and nurses) which will improve healthcare processes and outcomes.* Design re-measurement strategies (after intervention) of healthcare processes and outcomes to effectively quantify impact of interventions for improvement.* Analyze re-measurement data and summarize into quality indicator values.* Develop reports concerning all of the above.* Mentor junior Data Analysts in all technical aspects of their work.* Prepare draft manuscripts for publishing in peer reviewed journals.* Has developed expertise with standard concepts, practice and procedures in field. Relies on limited experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals.* Performs a variety of tasks some requiring independent thought and research. A degree of creativity and latitude is required.Required SkillsLanguage Skills* Ability to read, analyze, and interpret common scientific and technical and professional journals, technical procedures, or governmental regulations.* Ability to write reports, business correspondence, and procedure manuals.* Ability to effectively present information and respond to questions from groups of managers, clients, customers, and the general public.Mathematical Skills* Ability to apply advanced mathematical concepts such as probability and statistical inference.* Ability to apply concepts such as fractions, percentages, ratios, and proportions to practical situations.* Ability to apply mathematical operations to such tasks as frequency distribution, determination of test reliability and validity, analysis of variance, correlation techniques, sampling theory, and factor analysis.Reasoning Ability* Ability to define problems, collect data, establish facts, and draw valid conclusions.* Ability to interpret an extensive variety of technical instructions in mathematical or diagram form and deal with several abstract and concrete variables.Other Skills and Abilities* To perform this job successfully, an individual should have fluency in SAS or other statistical programming software and MS Office.* Ability to work independently and in teams. Must possess strong analytical skills with an understanding of the principles of epidemiology and biostatistics.* Ability to work with highly sensitive information while preserving the confidentiality of the information.* Working knowledge of healthcare systems, Medicare/Medicaid, preferred, healthcare databases and coding systems.Required Experience* Data Analyst IV* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) required, preferably in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science).* Minimum of 4 years of hands-on SAS or other statistical programming work experience, or demonstrated equivalent combination of education and experience.* 1-2 years' experience with health related analytic research and quality improvement methodology (ISO, CQI, TQM, Six Sigma, Lean, etc.) preferred.* Data Analyst III* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science) required.* Minimum of 2 years of hands-on SAS or other statistical programming work experience, or demonstrated combination of education and experience.* 6 months experience with health related analytic research and quality improvement methodology (ISO, CQI, TQM, Six Sigma, Lean, Etc.) preferred.* Data Analyst II* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science) required.* Coursework or work experience in SAS, SQL, or other statistical programming is strongly preferred.Qlarant, Inc is an Equal Opportunity Employer of Minorities, Females, Protected Veterans, and Individuals with Disabilities.,Apply now

Data Analyst
Irwindale, CA

1. Provide project analytical support to chemical safety management program, including but not limited to the following activities: a. Process requests for chemical product approvals including uploading the request form and safety data sheet into a Sharepoint database and notifying the reviewers of pending requests. b. Uses the SAP Master Data Governance System to request material codes for approved chemical products. c. Maintains the SCE catalog in the chemical management database, including entering new products, adjusting inventories, updating existing products and the vendor reports. d. Update the chemical management database in response to reports from SAP Master Data Governance. e. Maintain the Consumer Products list.
Provide project analytical support to Automated External Defibrillator (AED) program, including but not limited to the following activities: a. Support inspection compliance by providing monthly analytic support (run and analyze reports) and resolve issues related to non-compliant AED’s (follow up communications with AED users) b. Support in development of AED related job aids as needed
Provide project analytical support to various health and safety programs, including, but not limited to, development of presentation materials, tracking of action item completion, development and maintenance of SharePoint sites.

Job category

Branch

Pay rate

Posted date
12/5/2018

Job ID

Job type

MS Office Skills
Strong written communication skills
Highly organized and attentive to detail.
Ability to document processes in a clear and precise manner.
Ability to manage multiple tasks and assignments.
Able to work independently with a minimum of supervision.
Able to work well within a team.
Pluses:
Familiar with Sharepoint and how to administer databases in Sharepoint.
Familiar with SAP data systems and how to use them,Job Description
STAND 8 is a strategic services and staffing company that partners great talent with amazing opportunities in technology solutions for all industries. We work with top tier client-partners across the United States and have offices in LA, Atlanta, New York, and Morro Bay. This position offers full time benefits and longevity for talented associates who can work on a W2 without sponsorship.

We have a direct relationship with the hiring manager on this critical project and are setting up interviews next week for someone who can hit the ground running using innovative solutions. This position is for a Data Systems Analyst permanent position in Downtown Los Angeles, CA. Be prepared to make an immediate impact, join a collaborative, fast-paced, cross-functional team, and gain exposure to strategic decision-makers!

Overview:

The Data Systems Analyst is responsible for the configuration and maintenance of applications. This position works closely with the Operations Manager and IT Director, and has regular interaction with members of the Applications, Engineering, Help Desk, and Training groups as it relates to application deployment, stability, innovation, and maintenance. The Data Systems Analyst provides escalated support to team members, Help Desk, and end users.

Duties:
Troubleshoot application errors, isolate problems, and determine possible solutions in a timely manner.
Develop and implement resolutions to application errors and issues.
Continuously evaluate use of technology and internal processes, and evaluate for possible improvements.
Manage and perform testing for applications – initial, ongoing, and upgrade related.
Manage application product lifecycle and plan for changes.
Provide escalation support to the Help Desk.
Provide after-hours second level support to the Help Desk and/or users as part of engineering escalation rotation.
Provide support for other Data Systems Analysts for projects and tasks completion.
Provision and decommission Active Directory and/or Exchange accounts and groups.
Manage and maintain Active Directory environment.
Deploy and integrate new applications and systems to both local and remote systems.
Address Microsoft Windows updates and other security vulnerabilities, and adhere to a strict patching schedule.
Develop and maintain documentation related to responsibilities.
Manage and perform quality control testing practices and procedures for applications to provide and maintain a reliable working environment.
Develop, maintain, and manage relationships with vendors and consultants related to technologies.
Lead the evaluation and decision-making process for technologies.
Own and lead projects with little supervision.
Mentor and support the development of teammates.
Assist with creation of training materials for applications.
Qualifications:
Microsoft Office 365, SQL DBA, and an understanding of Citrix.
Windows 10 desktop operating systems.
All Microsoft Office 365 technologies including SharePoint Online, Exchange Online, OneDrive, Dynamics, Planner, and Intune.
Azure and Azure AD technologies.
Citrix and other remote technologies.
Microsoft Exchange 2016 and above.
Microsoft SQL Server 2014 and above (Clustering and DBA experience a plus).
Windows server operating system (Windows Server 2012 and above).
Microsoft Office Suite (Office Suite 2016 and above).
iManage Worksite (Versions 9.x, 10.x, and Cloud).
Litigation Support Applications (Concordance, CaseMap, Relativity, CaseNotebook, Trial Director).
Cloud collaboration technologies (Box, Microsoft, Google, RingCentral).
Accounting applications (Elite 3E).
Application packaging and deployment systems (SCCM Current Branch, Admin Studio, MSI Packager).
Metadata management software (Metadact-e, Workshare).
RingCentral Communication Systems.
Microsoft IIS Server.
High school diploma or GED.
6+ years of related technical experience with large (>300 users) networks.,ZS is a professional services firm that works side by side with companies to help develop and deliver products that drive customer value and company results. From R&D to portfolio strategy, customer insights, marketing and sales strategy, operations and technology, we leverage our deep industry expertise and leading-edge analytics to create solutions that work in the real world. Our most valuable asset is our people—a fact that’s reflected in our values-driven organization in which new perspectives are integral and new ideas are celebrated. ZSers are passionately committed to helping companies and their customers thrive in industries ranging from healthcare and life sciences, to high-tech, financial services, travel and transportation, and beyond.

ZS is a professional services firm that works side by side with companies to help develop and deliver products that drive customer value and company results. From R&D to portfolio strategy, customer insights, marketing and sales strategy, operations and technology, we leverage our deep industry expertise and leading-edge analytics to create solutions that work in the real world. Our most valuable asset is our people—a fact that’s reflected in our values-driven organization in which new perspectives are integral and new ideas are celebrated. ZSers are passionately committed to helping companies and their customers thrive in industries ranging from healthcare and life sciences, to high-tech, financial services, travel and transportation, and beyond.

ZS's Business Technology group helps companies define and execute their technology strategy by designing, building and operating the business intelligence (BI), cloud, data management, dashboard and analytics capabilities that are at the core of sales and marketing operations.

The Solution Delivery team implements technology based solutions in the areas of business intelligence, analytics, information management, reporting and mobility. In addition, this team configures ZS' proprietary software used to streamline business processes for commercial groups at client organizations. This team takes overall ownership of the delivery of the technical solution leading the design and development phases and collaborating with other teams for business requirements and system testing.

SENIOR BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY ANALYST

Responsibilities:
Partner with solution delivery lead to build comprehensive implementation project plans with well-defined tasks and owners;
Implement design and development phases innovative big data solutions to solve business problems across multiple client engagements;
Leverage information from requirements-gathering phase and utilize past experience to design a flexible and scalable solution;
Coordinate on-shore/off-shore teams;
Collaborate with other team members (involved in the requirements gathering, testing, roll-out and operations phases) to ensure seamless transitions;
Articulate the advantages or disadvantages of various big data technologies across a variety of client use cases.
Qualifications:
A bachelor’s/master’s degree in Computer Science or related field from a top university; MBA is desirable;
4-6 years of professional experience in IT, IT services or consulting work;
1-2 years of experience in the development of open source big data platforms, including: Hadoop, Hive, HBase, Pig, Spark, Sqoop, Flume, Kafka;
Programming experience in SQL, Java, Python, R, Scala;
Experience developing 2-3 end-to-end big data/cloud based solutions across multiple technologies;
Proven ability to lead both on-shore and off-shore teams in the development of big data solutions;
Deep expertise in the principals and architecture of various technologies within the big data stack is required;
Ability to communicate clearly and effectively in interpersonal and written formats;
Familiarity with agile development and DevOps best practices preferred.
Strong leadership, verbal and written communication skills with ability to articulate results and issues to internal and client teams
Proven ability to work creatively and analytically in a problem-solving environment
Ability to work within a virtual global team environment and contribute to the overall timely delivery of multiple projects
Knowledge of current issues, practices, methodologies, and trends in the Business Intelligence domain
ZS is a global consulting firm; fluency in English is required, additional fluency in at least one European or Asian language is desirable.
Candidates must possess work authorization for their intended country of employment. An on-line application, including a cover letter expressing interest and a full set of transcripts (official or unofficial), is required to be considered.
ZS offers a competitive compensation package with salary and bonus incentives, complete medical/dental/life insurance programs and retirement savings benefits. We are an Equal Opportunity Employer.
NO AGENCY CALLS, PLEASE.

Connect with ZS on social media:
Like ZS Careers on Facebook
Follow ZS Careers on Twitter and Instagram
Follow ZS on LinkedIn for more job opportunities
Subscribe to the ZS YouTube channel
Explore the Life at ZS blog
ZS has been recognized globally for its expertise in consulting and its flexible work environment. View ZS’s accolades.,Job Description
At least 3 years of embedded systems development and deployment experience.
Demonstrate a good working knowledge of embedded security best practices and the secure development lifecycle.
Perform security design reviews of applications, systems, and networks
Provide remediation guidance and recommendations to developers and system designers
Experience implementing security applications for embedded systems.
Experience securing sensitive data on an embedded system.
Very knowledgeable of core security concepts and how they apply to embedded systems.
Proficient programmer (i.e., C, C++, C#, and Java).
Ability to learn new technology quickly and adapt to changes.
Able to work independently with minimal supervision.
Strong oral and written skills.
Preference - Experience with both AWS & Azure cloud environments.
Preference - Agile/Scrum experience.

Company Description
MIDCOM is an innovative provider of IT, Technical, Engineering and Professional Services. For over 37 years, our diverse and expert service, talent, and advanced technologies have allowed us and our partners to win, deliver, and complete mission critical programs and initiatives within the Aerospace and Defense Sector.

MIDCOM has current long standing national contracts with the major Aerospace, Defense, High Technology and Cyber Security agencies and Prime Contractors. Aerospace has been the primary focus of MIDCOM’s business for over 37 years and we have an in depth understanding of the skill sets, experience, and controls needed to operate in this industry with unparalleled success. Our employees work with us over the years and through changing economies because we treat them fairly and with respect.

Midcom is proud to become a Cenergy company. To learn more about Cenergy, please visit www.cenergyintl.com,Odesus is a premier IT consulting company specializing in project staff augmentation. For over a decade, Odesus has been the go-to company providing top quality IT consultants. Our client in Burbank, CA is currently seeking a contract Data Analyst to join their Asset Management team and be responsible for the day to day management of discovered asset data. Ideal candidates will have strong understanding of eDiscovery process and be able to identify and resolve discovery errors, manage data coming into the CMDB and perform quality audits. Strong knowledge of full lifecycle of asset management of both software and hardware, strong Excel and prior experience with ServiceNow Discovery is highly preferred. For immediate consideration and more information, send your Word resume to cyoonodesus.com today! Note... remote work is available at this current time, but candidates are expected to be able to work onsite in Burbank, CA when appropriate. Local candidates highly preferred.,Jr. Data Analyst

Category: Information Systems
Type: Contractor
Description: A leading Third Party Claims Administrator, located in Pittsburgh, PA, is seeking a Jr. Data Analyst for a 8+ month contract role.

Summary: The Senior Data Analyst position is responsible for MySQL data monitoring, enhancements and improvements deemed warranted by the compliance team and product manager. This role will serve as gatekeeper of the MySQL data and include automating of data conversions and procurement, interpretation and conversion of Medical Bill Review data as required by the needs of the data team.

Responsibilities:
● Application/data monitoring and improvements to enhance efficiency and productivity.
● Automation of data conversions.
● Work with the database assigned product manager and database infrastructure lead to implement changes aimed at efficiency and scalability.
● Procurement, interpretation and documentation of all data applicable to Medical Bill Review. (CMS Pricer, CMS APC, Physician Fee Schedules, Usual and Customary, Pharmaceutical, CPT, ICD9, etc?)
● Knowledge of state, federal and industry standard fee schedules, reimbursement methodologies and regulations, including but not limited to: DRG, ASC, APR-DRG, OPPS and RBRVS
● Populating and/or manipulating data in development, test and production environments.
● Work with software developers to implement changes defined by the State and Federal laws.
● Internal support and assistance to other members of the data team.

Qualifications:
Four (4) years of related experience or equivalent combination of experience and education required. Experience in claims management processes and system requirements preferred.

● Knowledge of SQL and related database tools.
● Knowledge of Microsoft Access.
● Ability to work with the software development community.

Experience/Education
Bachelor's degree requested; major in computer science field preferred.

● Experience working in a relational database environment
● MySQL experience preferred
● Experience in the medical field necessary
● Detail oriented person desired

Location Pittsburgh , PA
Minimum Experience (yrs):
Required Education: Not Specified
Benefits:

Return to search results Email this job to a friend

*Logged in members may also add jobs to their job cart,Sr. Data Analyst

Category: Information Systems
Type: Contractor
Description: A leading Third Party Claims Administrator, located in Pittsburgh, PA, is seeking a Sr. Data Analyst for a 8+ month contract role.

Summary: The Senior Data Analyst position is responsible for MySQL data monitoring, enhancements and improvements deemed warranted by the compliance team and product manager. This role will serve as gatekeeper of the MySQL data and include automating of data conversions and procurement, interpretation and conversion of Medical Bill Review data as required by the needs of the data team.

Responsibilities:
● Application/data monitoring and improvements to enhance efficiency and productivity.
● Automation of data conversions.
● Work with the database assigned product manager and database infrastructure lead to implement changes aimed at efficiency and scalability.
● Procurement, interpretation and documentation of all data applicable to Medical Bill Review. (CMS Pricer, CMS APC, Physician Fee Schedules, Usual and Customary, Pharmaceutical, CPT, ICD9, etc?)
● Knowledge of state, federal and industry standard fee schedules, reimbursement methodologies and regulations, including but not limited to: DRG, ASC, APR-DRG, OPPS and RBRVS
● Populating and/or manipulating data in development, test and production environments.
● Work with software developers to implement changes defined by the State and Federal laws.
● Internal support and assistance to other members of the data team.

Qualifications:
● Knowledge of SQL and related database tools.
● Knowledge of Microsoft Access.
● Ability to work with the software development community.

Experience/Education
● Experience working in a relational database environment
● MySQL experience preferred
● Experience in the medical field necessary
● Detail oriented person desired

Location Pittsburgh , PA
Minimum Experience (yrs):
Required Education: Not Specified
Benefits:

Return to search results Email this job to a friend

*Logged in members may also add jobs to their job cart,USDM Life Sciences Overview

USDM Life Sciences provides a variety of IT and compliance solutions to help life sciences companies streamline laboratory, clinical and manufacturing operations while staying in compliance with FDA regulations. USDM disrupts convention and delivers compliance with proficiency, simplicity, and efficiency to achieve better results for our customers that are in the business of saving lives. It’s a place where you can make an impact in the world as a champion for life sciences innovation and also get the experience and mentoring to grow your career.

Founded in Santa Barbara, California in 1999 by two UCSB graduates, USDM has grown to a global company with offices throughout the US, Toronto, Canada and Frankfurt, Germany.

LIMS Master Data System

Description:
• This role would be responsible for building product specifications, test methods, misc. master data objects.
• This person will work closely with the support team and project team to resolve issues related to Master Data.
Requirements:
• 3+ years hands-on Labvantage LIMS experience in the pharma industry, with working knowledge/understanding of GMP, Product Specifications and Test Methods.
• Understanding of laboratory processes and methods
• Prior experience using and preferably configuring Labvantage LIMS platforms
• Experience in investigating user needs and then translating them into working features and functions within a Labvantage LIMS system.
• Technically curious, with strong analytical and problem-solving skills
• Strong communication and collaboration skills and a friendly, outgoing attitude,Data Transformation Analyst
Work Location


National

Job Code

2205

Apply Now

Data Transformation Analyst

Job Location: Boston, Charlotte, Chicago, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Columbus, Indianapolis, Louisville, Miami, Seattle, St. Louis

Join our team

Centric Consulting is not the typical consulting company. We live our core values and bring them with us in all we do for our clients and community. Our core purpose is simple: every day we strive to provide unmatched customer and employee experiences and foster a culture of respect, diversity, and transparency. It’s this culture, our people, and delivery that come together to make Centric a trusted advisor to local businesses.

Our Data & Analytics practice believes that data can drive business value and performance. But it takes the right people, skills and approach to deliver expected results. That’s where you come in! For us, Data and Analytics is more than just a set of technologies. It’s about skilled individuals who can align technical capabilities to bring value to a business. What we value the most: people who are dedicated to delivering high quality solutions. It's not enough for things to look good on the surface. They must be built on strong technical foundations. We’re looking for ­­­­­­­­­­­­­a Data Transformation Analyst to join our growing team.

Summary:

The Data Transformation Analyst is responsible for developing data models and then specifying how raw source data is transformed into those models. The responsibility for data accuracy rests on your shoulders. You will partner with a Business Analytics Designer to ensure a high-quality data warehouse and visualization solutions.

In this role, you will:
Review existing business requirements: UML information models, business and metric definitions, analytics use cases and visualization specs
Design data models to meet business requirements
Maintain data models in a data-modeling tool (e.g. Enterprise Architect, Erwin, etc.)
Physically implement data models in a database and then manage in source control
Analyze source data
Interact with business stakeholders to determine how to handle data quality and data governance concerns.
Develop and document SQL queries to extract data from the source system in a fully transformed state.
Communicate SQL specifications to ETL developers
Conduct code reviews and data reviews to ensure the transformations where implemented per your specification.
Participate in data validation and testing
A successful candidate will have the following characteristics:
Mandatory skills – these will be assessed
o Very strong SQL skills

o Forensic data analysis skills

o Experience writing sophisticated data transformations
Data steward or other data governance responsibilities
Strong written and verbal communication
Target Experience: 5+ years’ experience around the skills above
What makes Centric different?
Special Culture – Our people make us different. We have highly talented, intelligent individuals across a broad variety of disciplines – who are eager to learn from you and share their own expertise. We embrace fresh perspectives and each other. Don’t take our word for it – check us out on Glassdoor, Facebook, Twitter or Instagram to get a glimpse inside what makes us different.
Growth opportunities – As a mid-size firm, there is more flexibility when it comes to career paths. Figure out what you want to do and we'll help you figure out how to get there.
Impact – We think of ourselves as a big company with a small company feel – a local player with global reach that combines business, technology and industry expertise.
Unmatched Experiences – We are allowed to be ourselves here. We are encouraged to be human. It’s at the root of who we are as a firm and why we’re here.
Innovation – We value passion, determination, perseverance, and innovation. We are inspired because we believe in what we are doing and where we are going.
Passion for the greater good – We are steadfast in our devotion to the communities we serve and in actively promoting employee involvement in community improvement projects.
Centric believes the best solutions come from diverse teams. We strive to have an environment where everyone has an opportunity to be successful regardless of their race, color, religion, gender, national origin, ancestry, age, disability, military or veteran status, sexual orientation or gender identity.,Role Description

By leveraging our relationships with retail pharmacy chains, PBM’s, and data clearinghouses, Milliman IntelliScript assesses pharmacy and other types of data on an identified and de-identified basis. IntelliScript’s SaaS tools analyze and organize large quantities of data through risk management applications for health plans and life insurers. The Analysts on our Analytics team provide detailed reporting for internal teams and our clients, and support products across the practice.

Opportunity Highlights
Work on and manage a variety of routine and ad hoc projects on a growing team
Research and provide in-depth analysis to drive business decisions
Innovation and ideas are always welcome at IntelliScript, and success is highly visible
Enjoy autonomy to work independently with strong trust and communication among the team
Milliman demonstrates work-life balance through a variety of perks and programs
Responsibilities
Work with colleagues and clients to determine reporting needs, address data quality issues, support data reconciliation, and create project deliverables
Creative problem solving using spreadsheets, databases and other resources to organize and analyze information
Manage ad-hoc projects and collaborate with team members across the business
Communicate results in well written reports and presentations in a clear and concise manner
Anticipate and address questions that will arise during business review and client delivery
Use discretion and independent judgment to determine how to complete assigned projects, subject to peer review
Check and validate peers’ work and results
Professional Qualifications
Bachelor’s Degree in actuarial science, mathematics, or other major with quantitative course work, or equivalent experience
1 or more completed internships, and/or 1 or more years of relevant work experience
Proficient in Microsoft Excel, e.g. able to create pivot tables, V-lookups, etc.
Experience with SQL, R, VBA or other querying or programming language(s)
Personal Qualifications
Ambition and excitement for professional development through work and study
Strong technical and analytical skills
Demonstrated“let’s find a way to do it” attitude– no task is too big or too small, willing to pitch in wherever needed
Resourceful; tenacious in solving problems; asks questions and contributes ideas to determine the best way to accomplish a goal
Ambition and excitement for their professional development
Diligent in follow up, and meeting deadlines
Excellent attention to detail, organization, and time management skills
Articulate and professional when speaking with clients as well as with colleagues, via all mediums (phone, email, Zoom, Microsoft Teams, etc.)
Thrive in an entrepreneurial and collaborative culture
Preferred (Not Required)
Experience with Microsoft Power BI
Experience with Wrike or other project management software
Location

This position will be based either out of the Milliman office in Brookfield, WI or Chicago, IL. Applicants must be willing to work onsite in their Milliman office. All aspects of this position are identical between both locations (types of projects, organizational structure, etc.). Our offices work together, with the only difference being physical location. All employees are currently working remotely and will do so until such a time when we can return to the office safely.

About Us

Milliman, Inc. is recognized as one of the top firms providing professional services to the insurance industry. Milliman IntelliScript is a specialty software-as-a-service (SaaS) unit of Milliman that provides valuable real-time data and underwriting decision support tools to health and life insurers. With deep understanding and expertise in the life and health insurance markets, IntelliScript offers an innovative suite of products to interpret and deliver electronic medical data (such as prescription histories, diagnoses, treatment data, etc.) to help clients make effective underwriting and group/population analysis decisions.

IntelliScript has averaged annual sales growth exceeding 20% in the last several years. As part of Milliman, IntelliScript offers a unique, entrepreneurial environment, as well as competitive compensation and benefits. Our guiding principles are: Delight Our Clients, Innovation, Excellence, Transparency, and Balance. We are looking for collaborative people who are ready to be part of our long-term success. Visit our LinkedIn page for a closer look at our company and culture:Milliman IntelliScript on LinkedIn

Applicants must be presently authorized to work in the United States on a full-time basis. The IntelliScript Practice does not sponsor individuals for the purpose of obtaining or maintaining H-1B, O-1, TN, or other non-immigrant work authorizing status for this position.,Full Time - Fully Remote

Company: Lantana Consulting Group provides services and software for standards-based health information exchange. We have built our expertise through more than a decade of development and deployment of technical specifications and interoperability solutions. As a distributed company with no single brick and mortar office, Lantana can hire the best available talent and offer a flexible work schedule. We are a small, growing business on a path towards employee ownership.

Primary purpose: Provide data analysis and visualization support for the CDC National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN).

A successful candidate has the skills to:
Quickly gather requirements, learn subject matter, and extract and transform data.
Be proficient with PowerBI and Microsoft data toolset.
Automate, deliver, and schedule visualization reports.
Test data models, calculations, and quality of analytical output.
Optimize data models and visualizations for responsiveness and performance.
Visualize data geospatially using GIS technologies and techniques.
Understand and use statistical processes and software (SAS, R, Python).
Apply Microsoft DAX and construct advanced calculations.
Connect to variety of data sources and proficiently use the queried data in Power BI.
Be or become familiar with secondary tools and technologies like Microsoft SQL, Azure, Data Lake, NoSQL, data streaming, etc.
Effectively deliver and present work to the appropriate audience.
Meet deadlines and manage concurrent deliverables.
Qualifications:
Proficient in the development of highly visual reports, dashboards, and data narratives.
Experience with data extraction, cleaning and wrangling, modeling and manipulation to prepare data for analysis, reporting, and visualization.
Degree in public health, computer science, or related discipline preferred.
Experience with Healthcare-Associated Infections (HAI) data preferred.
Knowledge of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) preferred.
Additional Job Information:
There are two positions available for this role.
These positions are mid-to-senior level with opportunity for growth within the company.
Travel can be up to 5% time, depending on projects and responsibilities. At present, due to COVID-19, no travel or onsite work is required.
This position is fully work-from-home/remote and accepts all applicants in the US.
Job Type: Full-time

Experience:
NHSN: 1 year (Preferred)
Power BI: 2 years (Required)
Public Health: 2 years (Preferred)
Company's website:
https://lantanagroup.com/,As a Business Analyst working within the Data Services Team you will serve a key role for our outsourcing business by serving as the link between external clients, internal client team, and inbound data management. You will contribute to the implementation of data conversion and import ensuring high quality data integrity and integration.

Note: Employment-based non-immigrant visa sponsorship and/or assistance is not offered for this specific job opportunity.

The Role

A Few Select Responsibilities:
Update and maintain all requirements and specification documents, ensuring adherence to standards.
Participate in client and internal planning meetings, as required, for all assigned projects.
Effectively gather and document system requirements (while remaining cognizant of scope) by asking probing and clarifying questions, sharing best practices, and organizing client provided information and business rules.
Translate business requirements into technical specifications for application using standard documentation templates.
Responsible for system configuration based on client requirements.
Utilize technology (SQL, Excel, text editors) to identify and isolate issues, analyse data, uncover root causes, and automate solutions.
Create, maintain, and use test plans, including identifying comprehensive test scenarios, finding test cases, and developing expected results, for each component/change.
Ownership of issues through to closure including involving other team members and escalating to the team leads as required.
Identify reporting needs and requirements.
Work closely with team (i.e. other business analysts, software developers) to ensure project requirements/requests for changes are understood and within standards.
Provide guidance to other team members regarding data details and best/standard practices.
Provide guidance/assistance to team members where needed to help ensure issues are resolved by assigned due date.
Escalate concerns regarding deliverables and scope of work to team leads.
Train and help transition ongoing processing requirements to client team.
Research issues and cases to determine root cause and provide impact analysis for ongoing issues and changes and requests for new functionality.
Addresses all data issues that have downstream system impacts.
Assist team leads with project planning and or significant change orders.
The Requirements
A passion to work with data!
3 or more years of experience as a Business Analyst or Systems Analyst
Prior experience as a business analyst in a consulting environment preferred
Experience working on or with HRIS and conversion data
Understanding of the fundamentals of health and welfare and broader benefit plan design preferred
Experience with relational databases including SQL Server (preferred), Oracle or Access (applicable)
SQL and Excel Data Skills
Experience with test plan creation, testing procedures, and test plan execution
Strong analytical, integrative and problem-solving skills
Ability to understand business needs and complexities as they apply to the solutions at-hand
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Solid interpersonal skills and client service orientation
Ability to work both independently and in collaboration with others, including virtual work teams with members in different geographic regions
Prioritize the success of the team over individual goals
Strong organizational abilities and flexibility to recognize and shift focus to the highest priority tasks or support others on high priority work.
Familiarity with agile processes and tools is beneficial.
Sense of accountability, owning one’s work and taking pride in it; commitment to quality and continuous improvement
Desire to learn, accept new challenges, and have fun
Bachelor’s degree or equivalent experience in business, management information systems, human resources management, benefits administration or related field
Ability to travel (minimally) and work extended hours as needed
EOE, including disability/vets,**Candidate may reside anywhere in the United States, as significant travel is required (up to 100%). Potential for some international travel depending on project.

**Maine Pointe is unable to sponsor any candidates at this time. All applicants must be authorized to work in the United States through U.S. Citizenship, Green card or Permanent Resident authorization.

POSITION SUMMARY

The Data Analyst has the primary responsibility of data collection, cleansing, modeling, and reporting of results. The qualified candidate will implement analytical approaches using advanced analytics techniques while working closely with stakeholders and teammates from non-technical disciplines. Use statistical theory through modeling, simulation, and large data analysis to deliver lasting measurable improvements to clients. This position will require experience industry leading BI platforms (Alteryx, Power BI, Tableau) to build and support the need for ongoing data-driven work to enhance the client’s systems and processes.

KEY ACCOUNTABILITIES
Timely completion of data mining, cleansing, and modeling of transactional and financial data from client databases (i.e., Oracle, SAP, JD Edwards) that ties to/matches GL account/financial Statements.
Create best-in-class/compelling visualization of data, dashboards, tools and reports that supports the interpretation and merchandising of conclusions that drives key decisions for client management.
Evaluate existing templates and tools and participate in design, development and testing to enhance functionality and capabilities.
Help develop procedural documentation for the strategic procurement, operations excellence and logistics management operating systems.
EXPERIENCE/EDUCATION
Bachelor or Master’s degree in business, accounting, finance, economics, or mathematics. MBA preferred.
3-5+ years of experience working in a senior analyst role within management consulting or industry experience with supply-chain, procurement, logistics or operations with emphasis in business intelligence
1-2 years of experience with diagnosing, prescribing, planning, executing, and presenting small to medium analytics and BI projects
MUST haveexperience in most the following areas: Spend Analytics, Inventory Optimization, Network Optimization Modelling, SKU Rationalization, Strategic Sourcing, Demand Forecasting, and Advanced Planning & Scheduling
Alteryx Software and workflow design
Tableau Software and interactive dashboard design
Proficiency with Microsoft Excel, Access, and VBA.
Programming languages such as Python, Perl, C, C++, Java
Web scraping/data extraction, database management, data mining and market research, data blending and wrangling and econometric modeling
Data mapping (data definitions and business rules, mapping requirements to source data, etc.) and data profiling.
Understanding of statistical analysis and applications (SAS, R).
SKILLS/ABILITIES
Strong analytical and organization skills with respect to supply chain activities.
Passion for big data and advanced analytics.
Desire and tenacity to learn new skills and adapt to new challenges with an exceedingly fast learning curve.
Extensive experience analyzing complex or disparate customer financial and operational data.
Ability to interpret analysis results using a variety of techniques, ranging from simple data aggregation via statistical analysis to complex data mining independently.
Extremely proactive self-starter that anticipates next tasks before it is assigned.
Ability and tenacity to develop creative solutions to complex problems and the ability to think way outside-the-box.
Strategic and tactical thinker.
Desire to not work at a big, bureaucratic, slow-moving company.
Able to speak proficiently with both IT and business audiences as it relates to project deliverables.
Ability to develop, sustain and proactively manage value-added customer relationships.
Capability to thrive in a fast-paced environment.
Ability to solve complex business issues.
Demonstrated ability to adapt quickly to changing customers and multi-task multiple projects.
Proven initiative, drive and focus on detail.
General knowledge of mainframe system architecture (SAP, Oracle).
Ability to work effectively within and across teams.,About Us:
Cedent is a rapidly growing, young and team-oriented organization. Our mission is to provide expertise and counsel rather than resources. We encourage the formation of joint teams with client staff to take a project from inception to implementation. Through this philosophy we provide identifiable business benefits in the most economical manner. Cedent enables business results by being a 'Value Added partner'. It offers integrated portfolio of services to its clients in the areas of Consulting, System Integration for key-industry verticals. Our resources bring their unique perspectives and insight based on their individual experiences, which leads to breakthrough outcomes for our clients. Our people make the difference by consistently delivering outstanding value to our customers.

Job description
As a Data Security Analytics Analyst, you will be using your analytical mindset and collaboration skills to support and improve the Access Service experience. You will utilize your technical and business knowledge to support secure, risk-based practices, exercising judgment within broadly defined practices and policies.
We look for you to be result-oriented, business focused, and successful at interfacing across multiple organizational units at various levels. The knowledge/experience/exposure with information security topics, including the design, development, testing, implementation or governance of information security practices and solutions, will be very helpful in this role. You should be prepared to demonstrate your knowledge of access management/risk identification and risk mitigation skills.

Required Skills
Advanced level of proficiency in SQL (grouping, joins, window functions) and experience with at least one scripting language (Python, R).
Ability to create a repeatable intake process for analyzing data, and driving solutions to complex analytical problems
Mindset for building reliable and reusable analytics tools
Strong analytical skills/problem solving/conceptual thinking
Experience working on an analytics team and presenting data analysis findings to peers
Previous experience in Information Technology / Information Security / Identity and Access Management.
Proficient in Windows, Midrange and Mainframe access provisioning and security systems.
Ability to identify, analyze and address problems to resolve issues whenever possible in way that minimizes negative impact and risk to the organization
Ability to work independently on initiatives with little oversight
Motivated and willing to learn
Strong leadership skills and qualities which enable you to work with peers and various levels of management.
Quick learner and self-starter
Proven ability of mitigating risk in the organization
Good interpersonal and communication skills
Desired skills
Undergraduate degree in a quantitative field – Math, Statistics, Physics, Computer Science, Engineering, etc.
Experience with statistical inference modeling techniques and cluster analysis
In-depth knowledge of data visualization and BI tools
Graph database experience
Knowledge and/or experience with data mining techniques
Familiarity with different data analytics IDEs
Enterprise Role Overview: As an experienced professional, provide advice to client management with regard to moderately complex security issues. Assists in the review, development, testing and implementation of security plans, products and control techniques. Coordinates the reporting data security incidents. Provides technical support to the client and management and staff in risk assessments and implementation of appropriate data security procedures and products. Monitors existing and proposed security standard setting groups. State and Federal legislation and regulations. Identifies and escalates changes that will affect information security policy, standards and procedures. Executes security controls to prevent hackers from infiltrating company information or jeopardizing e-commerce programs. Researches attempted efforts to compromise security protocols. Administers security policies to control access to systems and maintains the company firewall. Works on complex problems where analysis of situations or data requires an in-depth evaluation of various factors. Exercises judgment within broadly defined practices and policies in selecting methods, techniques, and evaluation criterion for obtaining results. Work leadership may be provided by assigning work and resolving problems. Typically 5-7 years of IT experience.

You Will Enjoy:
An opportunity to be a part of a great culture, an awesome team, a challenging work environment, and some fun along the way! Apply today to learn more and be part of our Growth story.

All applications will be kept strictly confidential and once shortlisted, our team will be in touch with you for further discussions.,Arthur Lawrence is urgently looking for a Business Analyst Data Governance for a client in Houston, TX. Kindly review the job requirements below. Your immediate application will enable us to place you successfully. Must-Have(s) 5+ years of experience working as a Business Analyst in the domain of Data Governance 5+ years of experience with Informatica Data Governance (Axon), EDC, IDQ, MDM Hands-on experience with data quality tools for data profiling, identity resolution cleansing Ability to configure AXON EDC including Business glossaries, dashboards, search, Axon maps, policies, and databases Solid understanding and hands-on experience with data governance principles, data management, data collection, analysis, and interpretation Nice to Have(s) Bachelor s degree in Business Finance, Accounting, or Management Information System Informatica certification is highly preferred Interested candidates can directly contact Ruhail at resumearthurlawrence.net or by dialing (281) 768-2715 About Us Arthur Lawrence is a management and technology consulting firm providing enterprise-wide business transformation and business applications implementation services. Our in-depth technical knowledge and broad experience of working with world-class companies enables organizations to leverage our capabilities in developing winning strategies and cost-effective solutions. We are an UN Women Empowerment Principle Signatory and are certified from National Minority Supplier Development Council. Acknowledgements from Industry Peers Winner of Entrepreneur 360 Award (2019) IAOP Award Ranked in top 100 internationally Arthur Lawrence ranked within the Inc 5000 twice in 2016 and 2017 as one of the fastest growing companies of America. Named one of the top ten fastest growing businesses in Houston in 2016. Ranked 25th in the HBJ s Fast 100 Private Companies Award in 2017. Our Seven Pillars We rely on the seven core values that we believe enable us to deliver quality for our consultants and clients Education, Integrity, Value Creation, Collaboration, Best Client, Best People and Stewardship Through strict adherence to these core values we have achieved success beyond all documented forecasts and anticipation. For more information, visit,Are you interested in helping Texas create communities that are more resilient in the face of future disasters? Join the ICF team and make a difference! Our growing Disaster Management Division makes BIG things happen every day. ICF is seeking an Environmental Data Analyst to help the State of Texas manage federal grants to carry out strategic and high-impact activities to mitigate disaster risks and reduce future losses in its communities.
Key Responsibilities:
Independently performing a variety of qualitative and quantitative analyses related to administration of Community Development Block Grant disaster recovery (CDBG-DR) and mitigation (CDBG-MIT) funds.
Retrieving, analyzing and interpreting a large volume of complex water resources data from a variety of sources, analyzing results and providing ongoing reports, including pipeline and status reports.
Performing quality control/ quality assurance on environmental datasets to ensure consistency and accuracy.
Identifying root causes of pipeline delays and proposing solutions.
Developing and implementing data collection systems, reports and other strategies that optimize efficiency and data quality.
Evaluating information and datasets to determine the risk of non-compliance.
Reviewing procedures and other documents to ensure consistency with processes, datasets, and measures from external sources.

Minimum Requirements
Bachelor’s degree in environmental science, environmental policy, public administration, or a related quantitative discipline.
Expert level knowledge of MS Excel (including the use of pivot tables and advanced formulas).

Preferred Qualifications
Ability to communicate complex quantitative analysis in a clear, precise, and actionable manner.
Skill in managing multiple projects and stakeholder interests with timeliness, accuracy, and quality.
GIS experience.

Professional Skills
Excellent writing and presentation skills, with extensive experience writing both technical financial opinions and clear communications of financial principles to a non-financial audience
This job is a Section 3 eligible job opportunity. We encourage applications from individuals that are low income and/or living in Public Housing.

Working at ICF

Working at ICF means applying a passion for meaningful work with intellectual rigor to help solve the leading issues of our day. Smart, compassionate, innovative, committed, ICF employees tackle unprecedented challenges to benefit people, businesses, and governments around the globe. We believe in collaboration, mutual respect, open communication, and opportunity for growth. If you’re seeking to make a difference in the world, visit www.icf.com/careers to find your next career. ICF—together for tomorrow.

ICF is an equal opportunity employer that values diversity at all levels. (EOE – Minorities/Females/ Protected Veterans Status/Disability Status/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity)

Reasonable Accommodations are available for disabled veterans and applicants with disabilities in all phases of the application and employment process. To request an accommodation please email icfcareercenter@icf.com and we will be happy to assist. All information you provide will be kept confidential and will be used only to the extent required to provide needed reasonable accommodations. Read more about non-discrimination: EEO is the law and Pay Transparency Statement.

Working at ICF

Working at ICF means applying a passion for meaningful work with intellectual rigor to help solve the leading issues of our day. Smart, compassionate, innovative, committed, ICF employees tackle unprecedented challenges to benefit people, businesses, and governments around the globe. We believe in collaboration, mutual respect, open communication, and opportunity for growth. If you’re seeking to make a difference in the world, visit www.icf.com/careers to find your next career. ICF—together for tomorrow.

ICF is an equal opportunity employer that values diversity at all levels. (EOE – Minorities/Females/ Protected Veterans Status/Disability Status/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity). For more information, please read our EEO & AA policy.

Reasonable Accommodations are available for disabled veterans and applicants with disabilities in all phases of the application and employment process. To request an accommodation please email icfcareercenter@icf.com and we will be happy to assist. All information you provide will be kept confidential and will be used only to the extent required to provide needed reasonable accommodations. Read more about non-discrimination: EEO is the law and Pay Transparency Statement.

Texas Remote Office (TX99),Job Description
Location: Houston, TX
Duration: 6 Months

Description:

Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PL/SQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities:

• Develop Oracle PL/SQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements.
• Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PL/SQL code.
• Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment.
• Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PL/SQL code.
• Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly
• Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates.
• Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations.
• Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business.
• Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests.
• Experienced in any source code versioning tool
• Follow SOX procedures for code deployment.
• Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled.
• Monitor batch processes daily/weekly/monthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-run/re-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends.
• Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements.
• Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible.

Education:

Bachelor’s degree in computer science, software engineering or relevant business discipline from an accredited four-year college or university or equivalent work experience.

Experience:

Experience including but not limited to
15+ years of experience in Software development
10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g
10+ years of experience in Oracle PL/SQL development
3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment
Strong Analytical skills
Troubleshooting skills
Team Player
Additional skills:

• Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must.
• Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams.,Arthur Lawrence is urgently looking for MDM Data Analyst for a client in Houston, TX. Kindly review the job requirements below. Your immediate application will enable us to place you successfully. Must have 6+ years of experience working as Data Analyst and having expertise with industry standards, regulations, and guidelines in database warehousing and other relevant systems. Proven experience of creating and maintaining documentation of Master Data processes for all domains. Prior working experience with domain structures, user authentication, digital signatures, and relational databases. Expertise to ensure quality of master data in key systems, as well as development and documentation of processes with other functional data owners to support ongoing maintenance and data integrity. Knowledge of end-to-end MDM development process and experience of Full lifecycle implementation. Bachelor's degree or equivalent combination of education and experience. Nice to Have Bachelor's degree in information science, data management, computer science or related field. Note Applicants must have valid work authorization in the United States and must be local to the given location, as visa sponsorship is not available at this time. Contact Information Talent Advocate Jordan Contact 213-457-0534 Email resumearthurlawrence.net About Us Arthur Lawrence is a management and technology consulting firm providing enterprise-wide business transformation and business applications implementation services. Our in-depth technical knowledge and broad experience of working with world-class companies enables organizations to leverage our capabilities in developing winning strategies and cost-effective solutions. We are an UN Women Empowerment Principle Signatory and are certified from National Minority Supplier Development Council. Acknowledgements from Industry Peers Winner of Entrepreneur 360 Award (2019) IAOP Award Ranked in top 100 internationally Arthur Lawrence ranked within the Inc 5000 twice in 2016 and 2017 as one of the fastest growing companies of America. Named one of the top ten fastest growing businesses in Houston in 2016. Ranked 25th in the HBJ s Fast 100 Private Companies Award in 2017. Our Seven Pillars We rely on the seven core values that we believe enable us to deliver quality for our consultants and clients Education, Integrity, Value Creation, Collaboration, Best Client, Best People and Stewardship Through strict adherence to these core values we have achieved success beyond all documented forecasts and anticipation. For more details visit www.arthurlawrence.net,Beyond Outsourcing This is OneSourcingEAG OneSource (1Source) is a dynamic and growing IT and Back Office Outsourcing firm focused on driving customer success. As an EAG OneSource team member, you will leverage your customer service, management and technical experience while driving continuous value both for your clients and 1Source. Gain the satisfaction of knowing that you are creating an immediate and positive impact for your customers on a daily basis by joining the talented and driven team of E&P professionals at 1Source!EAG OneSource is currently seeking a Data and Reporting Analyst with strong Spotfire, Power BI and SQL experience.As a Data & Reporting Analyst, you can expect to:* Manage the full life cycle of assigned projects, including research, data mining, data analytics, design, development, testing, implementation, and documentation* Conduct in-depth interviews with subject matter experts to fully understand the requirements, document business needs and convert them to technical specifications* Create reports, dashboards, and other visualizations using Spotfire, Microsoft technologies (SQL, SSAS, SSRS, Power BI) and other BI platforms* Provide accurate work estimates* Troubleshoot existing issues and provide solutions for both simple and complex reports* Verify data integrity and report accuracy ensuring client satisfaction* Respond directly to support issues and service requests* Assist in identifying trends in Business Intelligence and staying at the forefront of technology* Provide exceptional client service while building relationships with clients and internal team members* Other duties as assignedPosition Requirements* Bachelors Degree* 2+ experience in data analytics, experience in the oil and gas industry is preferred* 2+ years of Power BI experience* 2+ years of Spotfire expertise* Advanced knowledge of SQL* Custom report writing proficiency in SSRS* Tableau, Power BI, Alteryx, or Qlik experience a plus* Land, Accounting ERP back-end knowledge or experience a plus* Exceptional Time Management skills* Ability to independently lead analytic efforts requiring minimal supervision* Strong attention to detail, excellent organization skills, and ability to manage multiple projects under tight deadlines* Analytical mind with a problem-solving aptitude* Exceptional quality assurance, processes and execution* Strong and effective inter-personal and communication skills and the ability to interface professionally with a diverse group of clients, including management and senior level executives* Ability to identify opportunities, produce code and present solutions in a timely/fast-paced manner* Entrepreneurial spirit and self-motivated* Aptitude to learn new technology, products and concepts* Strong in all major Microsoft Office product (Word, Power Point, Excel) and Microsoft Visio* Our ideal candidate is Houston-based but we will consider candidates outside of Houston who are available to travel up to 50% of the time* Must be eligible to work for ANY employer in the United States; we are unable to sponsor H1B applicants at this time,Position Role/Tile: Data Warehouse Analyst III
Location: Houston, TX.

Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PL/SQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities:
Develop Oracle PL/SQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements.
Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PL/SQL code.
Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment.
Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PL/SQL code.
Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly
Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates.
Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations.
Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business.
Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests.
Experienced in any source code versioning tool
Follow SOX procedures for code deployment.
Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled.
Monitor batch processes daily/weekly/monthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-run/re-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends.
Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements.
Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible.

Education:
Bachelor's degree in computer science, software engineering or relevant business discipline from an accredited four-year college or university or equivalent work experience.

Experience:
Experience including but not limited to
15+ years of experience in Software development
10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g
10+ years of experience in Oracle PL/SQL development
3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment
Strong Analytical skills
Troubleshooting skills
o Team Player

Central Business Solutions, Inc,
37600 Central Ct.
Suite #214
Newark, CA 94560.,KAYGEN is an emerging leader in providing top talent for technology based staffing services. We specialize in providing high-volume contingent staffing, direct hire staffing and project based solutions to companies worldwide ranging from startups to Fortune 500 and Managed Service Providers (MSP) across a wide variety of industries

Job Description: Job Title Technology Analyst | Data Management - Data Integration | Informatica
Work Location & Reporting Address: Phoenix, AZ85054
Client Name: Client
Confidential 54.00
Contract duration 6
Target Start Date 01 Jun 2020
Does this position require Visa independent candidates only? No

Job Details:
Must Have Skills
Informatica
Database
Agile

Detailed Job Description
Hands on experience in Informatica power center, Talend At least 2 years of experience in delivering projects using Agile Methodologies and test Driven Development Deep understanding of all aspects of software design with a demonstrated track record of increasing responsibility Excellent oral and written communication skills

Minimum years of experience5+
Certifications Needed :No
Top 3 responsibilities you would expect the Subcon to shoulder and execute Informatica coding coordination Agile
Interview Process (Is face to face required?) No

At KAYGEN, we are always looking for dynamic, talented and experienced individuals. We invite you to join our team of talented IT professionals, consulting at client locations across the globe. Our culture is team-orientated; we strive to stand by our core values of respect, honesty and integrity. Our team of experienced staffing experts will work with you to find you the best opportunity. For more information please visit us at www.kaygen.com.,Na Ali’i is seeking a financial data analyst to support the Office of Financial Operations (FMO) within the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management & Comptroller) (ASN(FM&C)), in areas such as Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness Program Support, Program Management Support, Financial Management and Accounting Operations, and Systems Support. This position will support FMO in providing timely, accurate, and useful information for policies, procedures, and direction on accounting, finance, management control, financial services, and financial systems, as well as serve as liaison with external organizations for financial operations.

Leverage analytical and data-mining skills to process a variety of information, evaluate costs and benefits, and solve complex financial problems.
Conduct research and analyze data and review financial/budget data. Conduct variance analysis and perform data reconciliations. Provide data analysis and data visualization support to derive actionable insights using tools MS Excel, Access, and other MS Office suite applications.
Prepare routine correspondence, reports and briefings, and prepare and deliver actionable information in presentations appropriate for senior-level managers and non-technical audiences.
Review operating budgets, analyze trends and identifying ways to improve efficiency and increase profits.
Provide financial management support to client in various aspects of the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, Execution (PPBE) and reporting of FMO budget requirements as it relates to FMO operational requirements and audit readiness and to all appropriate stakeholders.
Analyze the budget and its execution strategy to include planning, scheduling, and coordinating actions in all phases of budgeting and execution activities for multi-year Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness (FIAR) programs
Analyze and report data from PBIS, STARS, SABRS and other budget and execution tools.

Skills/Qualifications: Candidate should possess:
Exercises substantial autonomy in the day-to-day planning and management of work requirements. Demonstrates accuracy and thoroughness; looks for ways to improve and promote quality; applies feedback to improve performance; monitors own work to ensure quality. Works collaboratively and exercises solid judgement in decision-making.
Excellent technical skills, organizational and planning skills, communication, and problem-solving skills, problem analysis, takes initiative and is adaptable and customer service oriented. Specifically, the ideal candidate will be familiar with, and have experience in working with large datasets or databases and possess strong quantitative ability and a keen eye for detail and accuracy.
Proficiency in Microsoft Office applications with emphasis in Word, Excel, Outlook, and on-line search engines required.
Understanding of the DON budget processes, systems, structures, policy and guidance desirable. Familiarity with SABRS and PBIS desirable.
Supportive of and collaborates effectively with co-workers to provide high quality outcomes in support of client requirements.
High standards for professional conduct in dealing with co-workers and clients.
Education and Experience:
This position requires a bachelor’s degree or higher in data science/analytics, statistics, mathematics, business management or an equivalent related field from an accredited institution. A minimum of three (3) years of progressive relevant professional experience in financial, cost, or operations research analysis support is required.
Experience working in or directly for Navy headquarters organizations is desirable.
Military Installation Access: This position resides on a military installation or within a government facility. Candidate must be able to qualify for and maintain a Common Access Card.
Clearance: This position requires an active SECRET security clearance.
The Nakupuna Companies are employers of equal opportunity that are committed to hiring a diverse workforce. All qualified applicants receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, age, ancestry, marital status, genetic information, national origin, disability or veteran status.,Financial and Data Analyst

Our award-winning Financial Reporting team is looking for an energetic professional who possess strong technical and practical problem-solving skills to deliver creative solutions in the course of demanding client engagements of many varieties. Ideal candidate enjoys problem solving, aspires to create genuine impact to clients, and appreciates working through technical data and finance issues. Successful professionals at Equity Methods are analytical, resourceful, low on politics, and high on impact.

With over 80 professionals and experience serving hundreds of publicly traded clients (including 35 Fortune 100 companies), Equity Methods seeks to combine the best of a large professional services firm with the best of an entrepreneurial, technology-enabled company. We work hard in the quest to have high impact and deliver exemplary client service that supports our client retention and overall growth story. We have consistently been rated a Top Company to Work for in Arizona.

About the Successful Candidate

You built a reputation as someone who loves problem-solving and learning. You learn quickly, and you enjoy the challenge of doing so. You think about your career and hope to find a home where you can make a genuine impact and see a link between your effort and the firm’s performance. Teammates view you as someone who moves quickly and follows through on your commitments.

In short, you’re analytical, low on politics, and high on impact.

Typical Qualifications:
Bachelors or Masters in finance, accounting, economics, or a related discipline with analytical focus.
1 – 4 years of experience in a financial data analysis, finance, financial reporting, audit or advisory.
Expertise and experience in manipulating, analyzing and managing data to create meaningful and insightful reports to finance professionals and business leaders.
Ability and willingness to think critically and solve “out-of-the-box” problems independently.
Creativity in engineering processes from both a controls and efficiency perspective.
Maturity in internal/external communication and time management.
Desirable: Exposure to database design principles, SAS or another programming language for high-volume data handling.
Desirable: CPA license or CPA candidacy; CFA or other similar pursuits also welcomed
The Financial and Data Analyst Role

As a financial and data analyst at Equity Methods, you will have an immediate opportunity to begin applying the skills you acquire in training to client work. You will then gain exposure to client data processes, engagement structures, project deliverables, and how we engineer well-controlled algorithms to reduce risk and drive automation. As your career progresses, you will begin interacting with clients, mastering the theory behind our reporting areas, leading reengineering efforts, supporting new client implementations, and more.

More specific roles and responsibilities include:
Supporting ongoing financial reporting engagements, by learning the inner workings of client processes, what purposes they serve, and how they address client needs.
Performing budgeting/forecasting and scenario modeling to assist in clients’ external guidance and internal business decisions.
Preparing flux analysis dashboard to explain compensation cost trend and various types of variances.
Preparing presentation and audit materials for client delivery meetings and external audit review sessions.
Developing programming skills. You’ll complete assigned exercises and engage in self-directed practice to develop the skills necessary to understand and build processes in our technology environment.
Designing, implementing, documenting, and troubleshooting processes in order to proactively manage risk and inject thoughtful control measures to ensure adherence with plan specifications and client’s needs.
Support in various practice initiatives related to service innovation, risk management, process reengineering, and industry thought leadership research.
Financial and data analysts will be supported by leaders of the practice in an effort to train and develop skills related to engagement management early in their careers.

Can start remotely due to COVID-19,TransPerfect Is More Than Just a Job…
Our greatest asset is our people, and nothing is more important to us than ensuring that everyone knows that. Each of our 90+ offices has its own individual identity, and each also has its own unique rewards.
Locations:
US-Tempe, AZ (1725 Greentree),Data Analyst

Responsibilties:
Analyze data from a particular business domain and define how best to organize it in support of Group's cloud data architecture runway
Work with stakeholders to understand the domain's functional and data requirements
Work with stakeholders to identify use cases for data consumption
Support Data Architecture by rationalizing redundant data and developing the approach building out the Group cloud data-warehouse and analytics platforms
Support broader architecture teams in defining a business domain's master data management approach
Define and document the Data Lineage for a business domain
Required Skills:
7+ years of experience working in the Data or Systems Analysis field
Strong SQL skills and knowledge of various database types and technologies
Familiarity with relevant data-related AWS services (S3, Athena, Redshift, Glue, etc..)
Knowledge and Experience working in a Scaled Agile Framework
Excellent collaboration and teamwork skills
Excellent written/verbal communications
Bachelorts or higher in relevant field
For more information please contact Mark Reilly at 908-758-5602 ext 206 or mreilly@itechsolutions.com

Since 1995, iTech Solutions Inc., has been providing IT Consulting and Direct Hire Services to the Insurance, Financial, Communications, Manufacturing and Government sectors with local offices in Connecticut, Minnesota, Colorado, Massachusetts, Tennessee, North Carolina, and New Jersey / Pennsylvania area.

Our recruiting strategy is simple, if you want to find qualified IT professionals then use IT professionals to find them. So at iTech Solutions, our personnel are all career IT professionals with a wide range of IT experience. We can honestly say our staff understands the technologies, the complexities of finding and selecting the appropriate personnel and the pressures of running successful IT projects.

Employer will not sponsor applicants for any employment visas, at hiring or in the future, including but not limited to H-1B visas. Corp-to-Corp or subcontract personnel will not be considered for this position.,Work with Records Information Management (RIM) team and Business record custodians in preserving structured and unstructured content into a hosted archive solution using Micro Focus Content Manager. Archive data is mainly due to M&A, as well as company system decommissions activities. Role works directly with current structured and unstructured team leads providing assistance and support.• Assist the team leads in improving and implementing IT Legal eArchive processes improvements by leveraging scripts, reducing steps, and creating work instructions
• Work with the team leads to present and demonstrate eArchive solution directly to business
• The ability to balance and prioritize multiple tasks at once is key to this job
• Create and execute system validation documentation as required
• Ability to create IT administration tools as seen fit
• Create validation documents documenting processes and sign-off
• Work with stakeholders to determine best processes and data to be used for document retrieval purposes
• Must be reliable and able to work independently with a positive, energetic approach
• Must possess a strong willingness to learn new tools and processes.

Experience:

• Strong Windows server and desktop environment experience
• 1+ years of SQL experience
• Enterprise Content Management (ECM) knowledge would be nice to have
• Working knowledge of Pharmaceuticaland / or divestitures would be nice to have
• BS in Computer Science or similar discipline or equivalent work experience

Job Requirements:

• Assist the team leads in improving and implementing IT Legal eArchive processes improvements by leveraging scripts, reducing steps, and creating work instructions
• Work with the team leads to present and demonstrate eArchive solution directly to business
• The ability to balance and prioritize multiple tasks at once is key to this job
• Create and execute system validation documentation as required
• Ability to create IT administration tools as seen fit
• Create validation documents documenting processes and sign-off
• Work with stakeholders to determine best processes and data to be used for document retrieval purposes
• Must be reliable and able to work independently with a positive, energetic approach
• Must possess a willingness to learn new tools and processes.,A leading Third Party Claims Administrator, located in Pittsburgh, PA, is seeking (2) Data Analysts for a 9+ month contract role. Summary The Senior Data Analyst position is responsible for MySQL data monitoring, enhancements and improvements deemed warranted by the compliance team and product manager. This role will serve as gatekeeper of the MySQL data and include automating of data conversions and procurement, interpretation and conversion of Medical Bill Review data as required by the needs of the data team. Responsibilities Applicationdata monitoring and improvements to enhance efficiency and productivity. Automation of data conversions. Work with the database assigned product manager and database infrastructure lead to implement changes aimed at efficiency and scalability. Procurement, interpretation and documentation of all data applicable to Medical Bill Review. (CMS Pricer, CMS APC, Physician Fee Schedules, Usual and Customary, Pharmaceutical, CPT, ICD9, etc?) Knowledge of state, federal and industry standard fee schedules, reimbursement methodologies and regulations, including but not limited to DRG, ASC, APR-DRG, OPPS and RBRVS Populating andor manipulating data in development, test and production environments. Work with software developers to implement changes defined by the State and Federal laws. Internal support and assistance to other members of the data team. Qualifications Knowledge of SQL and related database tools. Knowledge of Microsoft Access. Ability to work with the software development community. ExperienceEducation Six (6) years of related experience or equivalent combination of education and experience required. Experience in multi-line claims management processes and system requirements strongly preferred. Experience working in a relational database environment MySQL experience preferred Experience in the medical field necessary Detail oriented person desired,Job Description
Opportunity

Angeion Group is looking to welcome a Data Analyst to its rapidly growing team. This is a full time, onsite role, and you will be working at our headquarters in Center City, Philadelphia.

About the Company

Angeion Group is a leading provider of comprehensive settlement management services for class actions, mass tort, and bankruptcy administration. Leveraging world-class technology, proven best practices, and expert consulting, Angeion delivers the services and capabilities that drive greater efficiency in settlement administration. Formed by a proven and experienced executive leadership team, Angeion is bringing novel ideas and fresh approaches to notice and claims administration. For more information, please visit our website, http://www.angeiongroup.com.

About the position

The Data Analyst will be working with high volumes of data to support project needs. Your success is dependent on building a strategic partnership and becoming aligned with the operations and technology teams. We require a candidate with the motivation to succeed and a passion to excel. The candidate must be capable of rising to the challenge of working for a preeminent organization that serves national clients. As an industry leader, we expect our team to be willing to learn to accomplish their work with the highest operational excellence. You will work internally across departments and externally with clients and vendors, so it is imperative to always demonstrate the highest level of professionalism.

Duties and Responsibilities
Manipulate large amounts of data (mass insert, update, upsert, delete) either directly, using SQL statements or Excel, or through dedicated data management software
Review project requirements and provide expert advice regarding the structure of databases and forms
Utilize data analysis and SQL skills to design and develop database queries, extract participant-level data from databases and analyze the data using a variety of analytical techniques
Generate and analyze data reports from internal and external sources
Research and data mine as directed to retrieve data/status and develop/provide metrics as required
Collaborate in all aspects of the collection, verification and entry of data
Perform data transfer functions by importing and exporting data to and from the SQL Server, or other sources
Conduct quality control and auditing of databases in a client/server environment to ensure accurate and appropriate use of data
Design workflows to control access to data and optimize the flow of information
Provide all activities related to the administration of databases
Provide data and analytical support for cases
Document guidelines for appropriate database usage, data maintenance and key report processing
Monitor data management repositories and communicate documentation to team
Support with organization, tracking, maintenance and validation of spreadsheets
Develop a process and associated plan for the maintenance of existing reports, trackers, and documents for the creation, incorporation and maintenance of new reports
Design, implement, and maintain complex databases with respect to access methods, access time, device allocation, validation checks, organization, protection and security, documentation, and statistical methods
Fully document all work and comply with development best practices
Participate in and conduct code reviews of both team and vendor-supplied code and determine quality, identify bugs and evaluate risks
Ensure architecture is consistent with organizational development standards and align with industry guidelines and best practices
Continually work towards strengthening industry knowledge and all relevant applications
Communicate regularly and effectively with all colleagues
Exhibit a very organized approached and superior attention to details
Meet regularly with managers to provide feedback and facilitate communication
Adhere to all business processes while performing tasks
Able to take on new tasks and responsibilities as needed
Perform other work-related duties as assigned by management
Qualifications
Bachelors’ degree in computer science, business or other related field or discipline
Database system(s) experience required
Complex data analytics experience required
LAW PreDiscovery – LexisNexis experience preferred
SQL, advanced Excel (including VBA), data mining; prior coding experience constitutes an advantage
System implementation and system integration experience
Skilled in business analysis, process improvement, and project management
Minimum of 3-5 years of experience and a demonstrated track record of accomplishments
Aggressive problem diagnosis and creative problem-solving skills
Demonstrate a high degree of productivity while handling multiple tasks simultaneously
Ability to perform comfortably in a fast-paced, deadline-oriented work environment
Excellent written, verbal, communication, and research skills a must
Ability to be flexible to adapt and act quickly when urgent matters require it
Able to work effectively with diversified individuals of various ethnic backgrounds and professional competencies
Project a positive, professional image toward clients, vendors and staff in all interactions and situations
Maintain the highest level of confidentiality
Problem analysis and resolution skills at both a strategic and functional level
Excellent computer skills including all MS Office applications. (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint) required
Must be presently authorized to work in the U.S. without a requirement for work authorization sponsorship by our company for this position now or in the future,Title Data Analyst Location Philadelphia, PA 19103 Duration 12 Months + Description Very strong understanding of SQL (expert level) Advanced SQL query experience UAT background Data Profiling experience Source Target Mapping experience Data Warehouse experience Teradata and SQL Server Knowledge Experience working on Compliance projects highly desirable Interaction with business to gather requirements Able to work in Agile work environment Some kind of Business Knowledge is a plus Experience working on Compliance projects highly desirable,Opportunity Exciting Project Based and or career roles for experienced Data management analysts with consultive approach supporting large scale data transformation management. Greenfield BusinessIT transformation impelementation team sponsored and owned by the CTO. You will be managing data requirements on Greenfield Data Factory-Data Lake build. Goal is to build state of the art analytics and enterprise reporting environment. Domain CRM E-Commerce Environment EDW-Oracle-Teradata World Class Data Factory HDFS Enterprise BI Best of Class Stacks-HadoopTableauPython The Role You will be spearheading large scale requirements gathering representing business side for systems functionality, builds and customization 5-7 YEARS senior Data analyst, UAT, Target Mapping, Systems Analyis DATA LINEAGE, EDM, ER STUDIO, Meta data management, Data Quality, Data Governance, MDM Source Target Mapping, ETL data warehouse principles Strong leadership skills and ability to work effectively with strategic business sponsors Ex Big 4 or previous consulting experience is helpful. Domain expertise in any of the following is helpful etl- Data Warehouse,mdm, BI Superior client facing and communication skills is mandatory SQL QUERIES, EXCEL, Python Why this role? Greenfield Implementation-in Newly Created Data Factory Leadership Career Path Enterprise level edm Opportunity Base Bonus Pension!! AND 401K Match a+ healthcare Contact Brian Cassidy for confidential details bcassidya2c.com 267 234 7258,Cambridge Advisory Group, Inc. is an actuarial and benefits consulting firm. We are analytics-oriented leveraging data driven strategies to support our client’s goals and objectives.

We are currently seeking qualified candidates for a Sr. HealthCare Data Analyst position in our King of Prussia office. Responsibilities include ingesting, loading, validating, analyzing and reporting on large data sets.

This position will focus on medical, pharmacy, and eligibility data. The Sr. HealthCare Data Analyst will be responsible for acquiring data from various internal and external data sources, analyzing, and interpreting the data sets, and identifying useable and actionable results.

Requirements
Bachelor’s degree (BS) in Mathematics or Computer Science
5+ years’ working experience as a Data Analyst or Data Scientist in the HealthCare sector
Expert in Excel, SQL, and other analytical software
Experience with data mining tools such as Qlik, Tableau, or Power BI
Experience with developing medical and pharmacy utilization reporting
Experience with establishing utilization trends and meaningful observations
Experience with underwriting insurance premiums is a plus
Must possess strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate information with attention to detail and accuracy
Ability to generate information quickly and manage multiple projects at once
Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $70,000.00 - $110,000.00 per year

Benefits:
401(k)
Dental Insurance
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Paid Time Off
Schedule:

Monday to Friday
COVID-19 considerations:
This job can be performed remotely.

Education:
Bachelor's (Required)
Work Location:
One location
This Job Is Ideal for Someone Who Is:
Dependable -- more reliable than spontaneous
Detail-oriented -- would rather focus on the details of work than the bigger picture
Achievement-oriented -- enjoys taking on challenges, even if they might fail
Autonomous/Independent -- enjoys working with little direction
Innovative -- prefers working in unconventional ways or on tasks that require creativity
Company's website:
http://www.camadvgrp.com/
Schedule::
Monday to Friday
Work Remotely:
Yes,A leading Third Party Claims Administrator, located in Pittsburgh, PA, is seeking a Sr. Data Analyst for a 8+ month contract role. Summary The Senior Data Analyst position is responsible for MySQL data monitoring, enhancements and improvements deemed warranted by the compliance team and product manager. This role will serve as gatekeeper of the MySQL data and include automating of data conversions and procurement, interpretation and conversion of Medical Bill Review data as required by the needs of the data team. Responsibilities Applicationdata monitoring and improvements to enhance efficiency and productivity. Automation of data conversions. Work with the database assigned product manager and database infrastructure lead to implement changes aimed at efficiency and scalability. Procurement, interpretation and documentation of all data applicable to Medical Bill Review. (CMS Pricer, CMS APC, Physician Fee Schedules, Usual and Customary, Pharmaceutical, CPT, ICD9, etc?) Knowledge of state, federal and industry standard fee schedules, reimbursement methodologies and regulations, including but not limited to DRG, ASC, APR-DRG, OPPS and RBRVS Populating andor manipulating data in development, test and production environments. Work with software developers to implement changes defined by the State and Federal laws. Internal support and assistance to other members of the data team. Qualifications Knowledge of SQL and related database tools. Knowledge of Microsoft Access. Ability to work with the software development community. ExperienceEducation Experience working in a relational database environment MySQL experience preferred Experience in the medical field necessary Detail oriented person desired,JOB TITLE: Data Analyst

SALARY: $18.27+

Data Analyst

Under close supervision, this position is responsible for ongoing analysis of data and information, obtained from a variety of sources to ensure management and staff has actionable information to ensure quality data entry and integrity and contribute to meeting contracted performance measures.

OVERVIEW:

SUMMARY OF ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:

· Oversees, collects, compiles, analyzes, and interprets workforce data and information data for the workforce system, management and staff.

· Uses all reports generating methods and information technologies to extract, compile and analyze data; uses TWIST & WIT Web, ad-hoc and related methods to develop reports, review the information and provide meaningful feedback to management and staff.

· Provides detailed analysis of the data in support of the workforce system goals and provides staff with the tools to monitor and achieve performance targets.

· Participates in strategy development to meet/exceed performance measures.

· Provides quality analysis & workforce planning.

· Prepares and provide presentations for staff to individual or in a group setting.

· Provides technical assistance to staff regarding workforce programs, performance measures, and/or related policies and procedures.

· Runs ad hoc reports to meet requests and needs and utilizes external software to collect and analyze data.

· Apply proven principles of theory and design to build and manage a database.

· Implement best practices in information technology management.

· Determine significant features, advantages and disadvantages of various database systems.

· Provides monthly scorecards to gauge career center and staff performance.

· Monitors center staff caseloads and shares information with management.

· Reviews and processes data integrity (DINT) requests.

· Reviews and processes deletion requests.

· Reviews and processes merge of customer records requests and change of customer social security number requests.

· Performs other related duties as required.

Skills/Qualifications:

· Bachelor degree from an accredited university or college in a relevant field of study and 2 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development, or

· Associate Degree from accredited college with 4 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development, or

· High School Diploma or equivalent from an accredited educational institution with 6 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development.

· Prefer knowledge of workforce development programs, economic development, business intelligence, business trends and project management experience.

· Prefer work experience in a performance based environment, public or private, the ability to analyze and interpret information and data and provide relevant feedback for action.

· Strong leadership skills, ability to motivate and provide guidance to staff and management.

· Strong interpersonal skills; ability to communicate effectively and interact with all stakeholders; ability to develop solutions.

· Strong knowledge of effective management techniques and practices, including planning, developing and implementing strategies and assessing results.

· Analytical and problem solving skills.

· Must have a working knowledge of, and be familiar with Windows operating systems and client/server hosted and on-premise applications.

· Scripting languages (VBScript, JavaScript, etc.)

· Microsoft SQL database querying, scripting, and administration.

· Time management skills to stay on target with goals.

· Detail orientated and strong organizational skills.

· Excellent computer software skills for database and spreadsheet; advanced skills in Microsoft office suite, including Excel.

· Strong documentation skills.

· Extensive knowledge of workforce information systems, TWIST, WIT, and other relevant management information systems.

· The position is in the Workforce Solutions service delivery area. A Data Analyst must be able to relocate anywhere in the service delivery area.

· Ability to develop and maintain professional working relationships with management, coworkers, workers from other programs as well as the public.

· Bilingual English and Spanish preferred.

EEO/AA

C2 Global Professional Services, LLC reaffirms its commitment to the principles of equal opportunity and diversity. Our policy prohibits employment decisions based on race, color, religion, sex, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, ancestry, pregnancy, medical condition, age, marital status, national origin, citizenship status, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other protected status in accordance with the requirements of all federal, state, and local laws. Further, the company takes affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and employees are treated during employment without regard to any of these characteristics. Employment decisions can include hiring, firing, compensation, benefits, promotion, training selection, or other statuses or conditions of employment. All employment decisions will be made on the basis of individual skills, knowledge, abilities, job performance, and other appropriate qualifications.

Pre-employment Drug Testing/Background Check Required. C2 Global Professional Services, LLC is an equal opportunity employer/program. Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities. Relay Texas: 800.735.2989 (TDD) and 800.735.2988 (Voice) or 711

Overview:

Under general supervision, this position is responsible for ongoing analysis of data and information, obtained from a variety of sources to ensure management and staff has actionable information to ensure quality data entry and integrity and contribute to meeting contracted performance measures.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities

· Oversees, collects, compiles, analyzes, and interprets workforce data and information data for the workforce system, management and staff.

· Uses all reports generating methods and information technologies to extract, compile and analyze data; uses TWIST & WIT Web, ad-hoc and related methods to develop reports, review the information and provide meaningful feedback to management and staff.

· Provides detailed analysis of the data in support of the workforce system goals and provides staff with the tools to monitor and achieve performance targets.

· Participates in strategy development to meet/exceed performance measures.

· Provides quality analysis & workforce planning.

· Prepares and provide presentations for staff to individual or in a group setting.

· Provides technical assistance to staff regarding workforce programs, performance measures, and/or related policies and procedures.

· Runs ad hoc reports to meet requests and needs and utilizes external software to collect and analyze data.

· Apply proven principles of theory and design to build and manage a database.

· Implement best practices in information technology management.

· Determine significant features, advantages and disadvantages of various database systems.

· Provides monthly scorecards to gauge career center and staff performance.

· Monitors center staff caseloads and shares information with management.

· Reviews and processes data integrity (DINT) requests.

· Reviews and processes deletion requests.

· Reviews and processes merge of customer records requests and change of customer social security number requests.

· Performs other related duties as required.

Skills/Qualifications:

· Bachelor degree from an accredited university or college in a relevant field of study and 2 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development, or

· Associate Degree from accredited college with 4 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development, or

· High School Diploma or equivalent from an accredited educational institution with 6 years of experience working in the public or private sector, preferably in a field of workforce development.

· Prefer knowledge of workforce development programs, economic development, business intelligence, business trends and project management experience.

· Prefer work experience in a performance based environment, public or private, the ability to analyze and interpret information and data and provide relevant feedback for action.

· Strong leadership skills, ability to motivate and provide guidance to staff and management.

· Strong interpersonal skills; ability to communicate effectively and interact with all stakeholders; ability to develop solutions.

· Strong knowledge of effective management techniques and practices, including planning, developing and implementing strategies and assessing results.

· Analytical and problem solving skills.

· Must have a working knowledge of, and be familiar with Windows operating systems and client/server hosted and on-premise applications.

· Scripting languages (VBScript, JavaScript, etc.)

· Microsoft SQL database querying, scripting, and administration.

· Time management skills to stay on target with goals.

· Detail orientated and strong organizational skills.

· Excellent computer software skills for database and spreadsheet; advanced skills in Microsoft office suite, including Excel.

· Strong documentation skills.

· Extensive knowledge of workforce information systems, TWIST, WIT, and other relevant management information systems.

· The position is in the Workforce Solutions service delivery area. A Data Analyst must be able to relocate anywhere in the service delivery area.

· Ability to develop and maintain professional working relationships with management, coworkers, workers from other programs as well as the public.

· Bilingual English and Spanish preferred.

Physical Demands:

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. While performing the duties of this job, the employee is regularly required to stand, walk, sit, use hands for finger coordination, reach with arms and hands, pulling standard file cabinet and vertical file drawers, lift/carry 10 pounds of paper, drive a vehicle, stoop, kneel, talk and hear. Occasional travel required.

COMPANY OVERVIEW:

C2 Global Professional Services is an award-winning employment and training organization, that prepares and places people into productive jobs. Were located in five regions in Texas and one in Florida. We strive to fulfill our mission by following our Core Values of Respect, Communication, Customer Engagement and Ingenuity.

Come and surround yourself with talented and professional individuals who have also taken the next step of making a difference in someones life. You would not only have a great and dedicated team to work with, but you would also be eligible to take advantage of a competitive benefits plan which includes:
Health Insurance (with no cost options for employee only plans)
Wellness Reimbursement
Generous Paid Time Off
Paid Parental Leave
401(K) with 6% Employer Match
Dental
Vision
Life Insurance
Short and Long Term Disability
Pet Insurance
Equal Opportunity Employer: minority/female/disability/veteran,LMI is a government consulting firm, dedicated to advancing the management of government. We operate free of political and commercial bias, and we gauge our success by the mission outcomes we enable our government clients to achieve. Our clients value our objectivity, deep government IQ, and expertise in logistics, analytics, information technology, and management consulting. We seek talented, hardworking people who share our passion for public service and want to join us in solving the most pressing challenges in government management.
LMI is currently seeking an innovative, experienced, and highly-skilled Data Analyst to join our growing Advanced Analytics team in San Antonio, TX. In this role, you will create and develop custom solutions for our users in a collaborative, fast-paced, state-of-the art environment. To be successful in this role, you will be thorough, creative, and exceptionally well-skilled in all phases of the development lifecycle, with a passion for continued learning and collaboration.
*This position is located in San Antonio, TX and requires an active TS with SCI eligibility clearance*
*Also looking for candidates in these locations: Charlottesville, Fort Bragg (NC), Fort Gordon (GA), Ft. Meade, Hawaii, San Antonio, Germany, Italy, South Korea

Perform statistics, machine learning and analytic approaches to answer key intelligence questions, producing results and re-usable products that provide real value to Intelligence Analysts.
Work with analysts to interpret analytic results and refine analysis as needed.
Apply machine learning techniques to identify and transform data features, find hidden patterns and trends, build and optimize classifiers, create automated anomaly detection systems, and automate steps of the intelligence process.
Evaluate statistical models to determine the validity of analyses, implement evaluated models into production by collaborating with software developers, periodically re-evaluate and refine machine learning models being used in production.
Coordinate between Intelligence Analysts and Data Scientists to refine and implement models and monitor outcomes.
Collaborate with Data Scientists to develop processes and tools to monitor and analyze model performance and data accuracy.
Effectively communicate results and ideas to key decision makers, analysts and other stakeholders and shall provide information regarding dataset applicability to the stakeholder’s mission and for the intelligence community.
Collaborate with Intelligence Analysts to understand needs and devise possible solutions.
Perform documentation of all processes, models and activities by developing, documents, and implement a configuration management plan for data sets. This plan shall be used to control changes due to stakeholder’s intelligence functional requirements.
Research latest data science tradecraft and technology.
Curate and collect the data from a variety of traditional and non-traditional sources: extract data from sources, transform and integrate data in line with existing data, and load data into data stores for access by others.
Languages, Tools, and Techniques
Demonstrated proficiency with R or Python, and SQL to manipulate data and draw insights from large and small data sets.
Demonstrated experience implementing a variety of supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques (clustering, decision tree learning, artificial neural networks, etc.) and knowledge of their real-world advantages/drawbacks.
Demonstrated experience implementing statistical techniques and concepts (regression, properties of distributions, statistical tests and proper usage, etc.) and applications.
Demonstrated experience visualizing/presenting data for stakeholders.
Demonstrated experience with MS Office tools including Excel, PowerPoint, and Word.
Demonstrated experience with AWS, in particular products related to: analytics, compute, database, developer tools, and machine learning.
Skilled with data retrieval and storage, visualization and warehousing, and extract-transform-load (ETL) processes.
Knowledge of database solutions including SQL, NoSQL (e.g. MongoDB) and graph (e.g. Neo4j)
Knowledge of data visualization tools, such as D3.js, ggplot, Bokeh, etc.
Leadership, communications, and professional traits.
Ability to translate an intelligence problem into a Data Science problem, and to work with the Intelligence Analysts and ACE Chief to refine understanding of the problem.

Active TS/SCI clearance
BS in Data Science, Statistics, Applied Math, or related discipline or AA in Data Science, Statistics, Applied Math, or related discipline with 5 years of experience.
2 years of developing quantitative analysis products is desired.
5 years of intelligence analysis experience is desired.
Experience working with platforms such as Scala, Python, Java, R preferred
3+ years of related experience required
Advanced data analysis experience required
Significant experience with databases
Experience and familiarity with Agile-Scrum software development
Experience gathering and decomposing requirements
Proven record of solution development and deployment
Familiarity with web-based application development
Experience with testing, use case, and user stories
Outstanding communication skills, written and verbal
Highly-organized and able to manage multiple projects simultaneously
Team-player mentality with a positive attitude
Keen attention to detail and solid analytical skills
Able to articulate complex, abstract concepts concisely and effectively,Qlarant is a not-for-profit corporation that partners with public and private sectors to create high quality, safe, and efficient delivery of health care and human services programs. We have multiple lines of business including population health, utilization review, managed care organization quality review, and quality assurance for programs serving individuals with developmental disabilities. Qlarant is also a national leader in fighting fraud, waste and abuse for large organizations across the country.Make a difference! As a Data Analyst working on our Unified Program Integrity Contractors (UPIC) team for the Southwestern Jurisdiction, you can contribute to our efforts to make a positive difference in the future of our nation's healthcare programs. Our UPIC Southwest team identifies and investigates fraud, waste and abuse in the Medicare and Medicaid programs covering seven southwestern states (TX, OK, NM, CO, AR, MS and LA). You will utilize your SAS programming and analytical skills to detect patterns of potential fraud in large healthcare data sets.Our Dallas, TX office is the preferred location for this position, but we will consider experienced, home-based candidates residing within the UPIC Southwestern jurisdictionOur data analysts perform study design, data analysis, and report preparation. Studies originate from preliminary data analysis (trends), literature review, experience and expertise of the team, and mandated projects. Data analysis, including data preparation and presentation of findings is performed in conjunction with other analysts. Reports are drafted by teams with leadership of data Scientists.Essential Duties and Responsibilities:* Trend data to identify potential opportunities (e.g., variances, significant outliers, percentile ranked groups) for quality improvement or focused investigations.* Design data analysis strategies to identify potential areas for quality improvement or focused investigation.* Develop epidemiological sound indicators of the quality of care.* Analyst data and summarize into quality indicator values* Identify external benchmarks of care for comparative purposes.* Develop tabular and graphical presentations of data which clearly and concisely illustrate current levels of care.* Write draft reports which clearly and concisely illustrate current levels or care.* Contribute to the development of interventions (i.e., develop educational materials for doctors and nurses) which will improve healthcare processes and outcomes.* Design re-measurement strategies (after intervention) of healthcare processes and outcomes to effectively quantify impact of interventions for improvement.* Analyze re-measurement data and summarize into quality indicator values.* Develop reports concerning all of the above.* Mentor junior Data Analysts in all technical aspects of their work.* Prepare draft manuscripts for publishing in peer reviewed journals.* Has developed expertise with standard concepts, practice and procedures in field. Relies on limited experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals.* Performs a variety of tasks some requiring independent thought and research. A degree of creativity and latitude is required.Required SkillsLanguage Skills* Ability to read, analyze, and interpret common scientific and technical and professional journals, technical procedures, or governmental regulations.* Ability to write reports, business correspondence, and procedure manuals.* Ability to effectively present information and respond to questions from groups of managers, clients, customers, and the general public.Mathematical Skills* Ability to apply advanced mathematical concepts such as probability and statistical inference.* Ability to apply concepts such as fractions, percentages, ratios, and proportions to practical situations.* Ability to apply mathematical operations to such tasks as frequency distribution, determination of test reliability and validity, analysis of variance, correlation techniques, sampling theory, and factor analysis.Reasoning Ability* Ability to define problems, collect data, establish facts, and draw valid conclusions.* Ability to interpret an extensive variety of technical instructions in mathematical or diagram form and deal with several abstract and concrete variables.Other Skills and Abilities* To perform this job successfully, an individual should have fluency in SAS or other statistical programming software and MS Office.* Ability to work independently and in teams. Must possess strong analytical skills with an understanding of the principles of epidemiology and biostatistics.* Ability to work with highly sensitive information while preserving the confidentiality of the information.* Working knowledge of healthcare systems, Medicare/Medicaid, preferred, healthcare databases and coding systems.Required Experience* Data Analyst IV* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) required, preferably in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science).* Minimum of 4 years of hands-on SAS or other statistical programming work experience, or demonstrated equivalent combination of education and experience.* 1-2 years' experience with health related analytic research and quality improvement methodology (ISO, CQI, TQM, Six Sigma, Lean, etc.) preferred.* Data Analyst III* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science) required.* Minimum of 2 years of hands-on SAS or other statistical programming work experience, or demonstrated combination of education and experience.* 6 months experience with health related analytic research and quality improvement methodology (ISO, CQI, TQM, Six Sigma, Lean, Etc.) preferred.* Data Analyst II* Bachelor's degree (BA or BS) in Statistics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health or related discipline (e.g., Economics, Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science) required.* Coursework or work experience in SAS, SQL, or other statistical programming is strongly preferred.Qlarant, Inc., is an Equal Opportunity Employer of Minorities, Females, Protected Veterans, and Individuals with Disabilities.,Hello Associates,

***Greetings from Conch Technologies***

Â

Position: Data Analyst

Location: Plano, TX

Â

Job Description:
Typical DA

3+ years of exp

AWS understanding

Tableau

SQL

Data analysis and data management

Â

Â

Â

Thanks & Regards.

Mallikharjun.
Recruitment Lead.
Mallikharjun@conchtech.com
Direct:( 901)-444-3153Â
6750 Poplar Ave # 711, Memphis, TN.Â
Web:Âwww.conchtech.com
"A Certified MBE Company"

Disclaimer: We respect your online privacy, if you are not interested in receiving our e-mails, then please reply with "unsubscribe" in the subject line.,Data Analyst who:

- Is highly experienced in PowerBI

- 2 years of PowerApps development experience

- Enforces data quality, integrity, and reliability
2-5 years of analytical experience.
Familiarity with service parts including sales and marketing, purchasing, forecasting and inventory planning, distribution philosophies, and warehouse operations.
Advanced analytical and problem-solving abilities. Ability to querying data from multiple sources, conduct detailed analysis, understand business trends, and draw conclusions leading to participation in development of strategies.
Experience with user and/or statistical programming along with statistical modeling is preferred.
Understanding of statistical concepts and optimization techniques.
Project management experience. Lean skills and experience (TPS, Six Sigma) is preferred.
Interpersonal skills necessary to establish and maintain effective working relationships with peers/co-workers, executives, and other internal business areas as well as dealers and suppliers.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills. Capable of effectively communicating with multiple levels of the internal organization along with dealers and suppliers.
Self-motivated to initiate, drive and own projects. Ability to work independently, in teams, and with team members in multiple locations. Proven ability to focus on continuous improvement
Job Type: Full-time

Experience:
Data Analytics: 3 years (Preferred)
PowerBI: 3 years (Preferred)
PowerApps development: 2 years (Preferred)
Work Location:
One location
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Other
Company's website:
https://austincsi.com
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Job DescriptionMUST HAVE; Looking for relevant experience in troubleshooting performance issues and experienced in analyzing large data sets using statistical methods

SAMSUNG ELECTRONICS AMERICA (SEA)

As a Performance Assurance Engineer, you will be responsible to be part of a team of 4G/5G RAN Performance Assurance technical staff, business intelligence analysts, and visualization architects. You will be responsible to provide support and expertise for proactive identification of issues, analysis and diagnostics across a diverse 4G/5G network infrastructure using expansive data and measurement capabilities.

Specific Responsibilities include:
• 10+ years of professional experience in Engineering: 5+ years’ experience in Data Science with knowledge of data engineering
• Work closely with the internal and external stakeholders to define 4G/5G KPI measurement methodologies and targets (KPI, KQI) for 4G/5G RAN product acceptance.
• Work closely with stakeholders to help build products that help utilize large amount of structured & unstructured data in analyzing network performance
• Proactively define and interpret data/metrics/KPIs, analyze results, and provide insights to determine operational impact, trends and opportunities for all the 4G/5G RAN products
• Communicate key findings to stakeholders using visualizations and/or other suitable methods
• Aid in product & feature performance analysis, evaluation of new product & SW releases and 3rd party product evaluation using analytics/data science to drive intelligent business decisions and to build product synergies across all product elements
• Develop the A/B testing framework to aid in product & feature performance analysis, evaluation of new product & SW releases and 3rd party product evaluation
• Identify key datasets, and help define data pipeline from collection, processes, storage, lineage and data dictionary to ensure accuracy, completeness & availability
• Demonstrate ability to analyze and interpret a mix of qualitative and quantitative data using various data sources, construct compelling narratives, and provide actionable insights and recommendations on complex topics.
• Conceptualize and implement data extracts, data replication, reports, information dashboards, and other end-user information portals or resources to support the 4G/5G project deliverables.
• Excellent verbal and written communication skills to communicate key technical concepts, ability to package complex ideas into logical, easy-to-follow progressions
• Adapt to changes in a dynamic business environment, support management initiatives, and guide other engineers
• Present ideas, technical and non-technical, in a logical, compelling manner in a written format and verbally in both small and large group settings
• Communicate PA team budget, milestones and deliverables to project management and implement plans to accomplish the milestones within budget, as required
Background & Competencies Required:
• Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science or Electrical Engineering; Advanced degree in Data Science or a related Data Engineering, or equivalent experience is beneficial
• Strong technical knowledge of any wireless technology & procedures including CDMA/EVDO/LTE/Volte and/or 5G
• Must possess expert-level understanding of operational measurements/counters to monitor and define Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
• Experience with evaluating service performance trends and proactively defining RAN system performance related issues
• Experience with data visualization and ability to quickly grasp statistical methods, and methodologies. Maintain a strong command of current data analytics technology trends, including emerging paradigms and practices
• Successful track record defining direction and providing specific instruction for engineering projects/programs leveraging personal knowledge and organizational skills to increase team efficiency, facilitate personal development and mentor colleagues.
• Working knowledge of statistical concepts (distributions, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals) and experience applying to real-world applications
• Demonstrated research and problem solving skills via prior work experience. Experience with wireless infrastructure provider and/or operator is desired
• Must have a strong work ethic, integrity and work extremely well in a team environment

Physical/Mental Demands and Working Conditions: The position requires the ability to perform the essential duties and responsibilities in the following environment:
• Excellent interpersonal and communication skills. Must be skilled in developing and maintaining good working relationships with all appropriate levels within and outside the company
• Operate a computer keyboard and view a video display terminal more than 75% of work time in an office work environment
• Frequently works additional hours beyond normal schedule
• Performs work under time schedules and stresses which are normally periodic or cyclical and include time sensitive job stress, fatigue, unpaid over-time, intellectual challenge, constant technical data feedback, language barriers, and project management stress.
• Machines, tools, equipment, and work aids include PC’s, printers, etc. most often associated with office work area equipment
• Travel to customer locations, trade shows, etc. approximately 20% of time
• Under minimal supervision with a high level of responsibility to apply general policies and guidelines where decisions are seldom monitored, consequences of decisions may adversely affect operating results and management decisions. Position has complete access to confidential company data where disclosure may jeopardize the company’s competitive position,Senior Data Analyst
Site


Dallas, TX

Employment duration


Part-Time/Casual

Job Category


Business Analytics

Apply Now

Job Brief


We are actively seeking multiple Senior Data Analysts at our Plano, TX location!

Analytical Mechanics Associates, Inc., (AMA) is proud of our customer relationships, our diverse and dynamic work environment, and our employees' career satisfaction. AMA is a small business specializing in aerospace engineering, business analytics, information technology, and visualization solutions. AMA combines the best of engineering and mathematics capabilities with the latest in information technologies and visualization to build creative solutions. Headquartered in Hampton, VA, AMA has operations in Huntsville, AL; Dallas and Houston, TX; Denver, CO; Santa Clara and Mountain View, CA; New Orleans, LA; and Hancock County, MS. We offer a competitive salary and attractive benefits package. Our website describes our corporate values and how they apply to the professional success and growth of our employees.

Job Description


Analytical Mechanics Associates, Inc. (AMA) is actively seeking multiple Senior Data Analysts at our Plano, TX location. Project duration is 6-12 months with possible extensions. Projected hours are 40 per week. Key responsibilities include:
As a Senior Data Analyst you will leverage analytic and technical skills to innovate, build, and maintain well-managed data solutions and capabilities to tackle business problems.
On any given day you will be challenged on three types of work – Innovation, Data Management and Business Intelligence:
Innovation
Use Open Source/Digital technologies to mine complex, voluminous, and different varieties of data sources and platforms
Build well-managed data solutions, tools, and capabilities to enable self-service frameworks for data consumers
Demonstrate ability to explore and quickly grasp new technologies to progress varied initiatives
Business Intelligence
Partner with the business to provide consultancy and translate the business needs to design and develop tools, techniques, metrics, and dashboards for insights and data visualization
Data Management
Drive an understanding and adherence to the principles of data quality management including metadata, lineage, and business definitions
Work collaboratively with appropriate Tech teams to manage security mechanisms and data access governance
Build and execute tools to monitor and report on data quality
Our ideal candidate will have:
Degree specialized in a Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics discipline
Strong SQL programming skills and knowledge of relational databases
Strong scripting experience in any one of - Python, Perl, JavaScript, Shell, R. Python , VBA
Experience working in Unix environment- shell scripting, job scheduling
Experience using version control software (GitHub, Sub-version)
Strong desire and experience with data in various forms (data warehouses/SQL, unstructured data environments, AWS S3, Hadoop)
Education and Basic Qualifications
Bachelor’s Degree
At least 2 year of experience in at least one scripting language
At least 3 year of experience in querying and analyzing and working with data languages and platforms
Preferred Qualifications
Master’s Degree in a Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics discipline
1+ years’ experience working BI reporting tools (i.e. Tableau and Business Objects)
1+ years of experience working within process management and improvement methodologies – Lean, Six Sigma, etc.
1+ years of experience working with and demonstrating knowledge of data governance, data quality management concepts and data quality tools (i.e. Informatica DQ)
1+ years of experience working with Agile development methodologies
We are an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or veteran status.,If you are passionate about using data to tell a story to many different audiences and love to explore and engineer news ways to pull data in from multiple systems, this position is for you. This position is remote so you can sit anywhere in the continental U.S. We are looking for a Sr. Data Analyst, specifically with Healthcare Medical claims analysis experience. Our customer has recently stood up a new team that will grow to 6 people by the end of 2020 in order to provide appropriate insight across the organization. Currently there is a lot of work to be done to get the appropriate data from multiple sources including, PostgreSQL, SQL Server, Terradata, etc, rendering that data that tells a story via tableau to many different departments within this organization. This type of position would be the dream job for someone who loves to solve problems, educate team members and business users on what the data is actually saying with respects to their departments, and who wants to be heard and have a seat at the data and analytics table as they build this team. You will be the 4th member of this team as it grows to 6 by the end of year. You will be instrumental with this team to get to a predictive analytics environment for the organization. Some key skills that will make you successful are 1. Strong Python (PyTorch etc) and SQL background in understanding how to get the data you need. 2. Experience in the medical industry with high preference placed on experience with medical claims (ICD-910) and contracts analysis between providers and payers. 3. Capable of rendering finding via tableau with rich dashboards that can tell a simple story via a heat map for an executive to a more complex and intricate dashboard at the processing level. 4. Healthcare operations experience is a huge plus. HSITDice LI-TSI,KAYGEN is an emerging leader in providing top talent for technology based staffing services. We specialize in providing high-volume contingent staffing, direct hire staffing and project based solutions to companies worldwide ranging from startups to Fortune 500 and Managed Service Providers (MSP) across a wide variety of industries

Job Description.
Key Responsibilities
Define, measure and track key metrics to guide execution across multiple teams in the org
Build dashboards and reports for teams and business leaders and stakeholders to promote transparency and enable smart decisions
Build qualitative and quantitative models to deepen understanding of platform operational performance, and predict potential delivery risks
Leverage analytics to drive process improvement
Communicate in clear and concise manner for actionable changes focused on improving velocity, predictability, and efficiency

Qualifications
7+ years' experience in data analysis within tech industry
Technical expertise in data modeling, system and data base design development, and data mining techniques
Proficient in writing SQL queries on SQL Server, MySQL , Oracle.
Strong experience working on Business Intelligence tools: Power BI is a MUST, Tableau desired.
Need to have experience in creating calculated measures and columns with DAX in Power BI Desktop. (Aggregate, Date, Logical, String, Level of Detail etc)
Expert in setting up the necessary connection details and scheduling reports on Power BI Report Server, providing row level security, creating bookmarks etc.
Strong knowledge of programming/scripting language highly desirable
Strong analytical skills and detail oriented: ability to get to the root cause of problems and devise an analytical approach to reach actionable answers

At KAYGEN, we are always looking for dynamic, talented and experienced individuals. We invite you to join our team of talented IT professionals, consulting at client locations across the globe. Our culture is team-orientated; we strive to stand by our core values of respect, honesty and integrity. Our team of experienced staffing experts will work with you to find you the best opportunity. For more information please visit us at www.kaygen.com.,Employer: Vaco (Onsite Vendor for client)
Position: Data Analyst
Location: Palo Alto, CA
Role Objective
To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable
for the client’s ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for
consistent accuracy and an excellent review.
Data Analyst will provide feedback to client’s relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables
are expected.
Responsibilities
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling,
typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to ‘play’ with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported
language and English
Preferred Attributes
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc
Job Type: Full-time
Benefits:
401(k)
Health Insurance
Schedule:
8 Hour Shift
Monday to Friday
Location:
Palo Alto, CA (Required)
Language:
Italian (Required)
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
This Company Describes Its Culture as:
Detail-oriented -- quality and precision-focused
Outcome-oriented -- results-focused with strong performance culture
Stable -- traditional, stable, strong processes
People-oriented -- supportive and fairness-focused
Team-oriented -- cooperative and collaborative
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,KAYGEN is an emerging leader in providing top talent for technology based staffing services. We specialize in providing high-volume contingent staffing, direct hire staffing and project based solutions to companies worldwide ranging from startups to Fortune 500 and Managed Service Providers (MSP) across a wide variety of industries
Job Description.
Translate business requirements into tangible solution specifications and high quality, on time deliverables.
Partner with different stakeholders and execute proof of concepts to assess the value of solutions.
Should be able to do reverse engineering to understand and derive the functional knowledge
Experience in end to end development of a new set of reports, dashboards & KPI Scorecards
Analyze large volumes of transactional data to generate insights and actionable recommendations to drive business growth.
Automate data analysis and insight generation.
Collaborate with other team members and lead project development.
Passion for knowing for emerging trends and identifying relevant opportunities.
Demonstrate ability to think strategically about business, product, and technical challenges
Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization
Analytical/Problem Solving skills.
Apply quality control, data validation, and cleansing processes to new and existing data sources.
Support User Acceptance Testing for production applications
Support a high-performance workplace
Self-motivated with a proven track record of innovation and successful delivery.
Ability to work independently, fast paced and deadline-driven environment.
Excellent communication, presentation and Analytical skills
Drive customer communication during critical events and participate/lead various operational improvement initiatives.
Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera
Knowledge of ETL and expertise in any BI tools Power BI, Tableau, SFDC Einstein Analytics, QlikSense, Qlikview, OBIEE, SAP Analytics Cloud, Kibanaetc.,
Strong Tableau Administration and dashboard migration experience
Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage.
Hands-on experience in data modelling, programming, querying, data mining and report development using large volumes of granular data to deliver business intelligence and custom reporting solutions
Determining methods and procedures on new assignments, establishing these for the assignment and coordinating activities with other employees while leading a small team.
Contributing to your Department by
Documenting your learnings from the current work to produce an artifact such as an internal Wiki, a blog or a best practices document
Actively participating in Department level group activities and events related to learning, formal training, interviewing, special projects, knowledge sharing etc.
At KAYGEN, we are always looking for dynamic, talented and experienced individuals. We invite you to join our team of talented IT professionals, consulting at client locations across the globe. Our culture is team-orientated; we strive to stand by our core values of respect, honesty and integrity. Our team of experienced staffing experts will work with you to find you the best opportunity. For more information please visit us at www.kaygen.com.,Employer: Vaco (Onsite Vendor for client)
Position: Data Analyst
Location: Palo Alto, CA
Role Objective
To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable
for the client’s ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for
consistent accuracy and an excellent review.
Data Analyst will provide feedback to client’s relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables
are expected.
Responsibilities
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling,
typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to ‘play’ with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported
language and English
Preferred Attributes
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc
Job Type: Full-time
Benefits:
401(k)
Health Insurance
Location:
Palo Alto, CA (Required)
Language:
Danish (Preferred)
Norwegian (Required)
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
This Company Describes Its Culture as:
Detail-oriented -- quality and precision-focused
Outcome-oriented -- results-focused with strong performance culture
Stable -- traditional, stable, strong processes
People-oriented -- supportive and fairness-focused
Team-oriented -- cooperative and collaborative
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
8 hour shift
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Employer: Vaco (Onsite Vendor for client)
Position: Data Analyst
Location: Palo Alto, CA
Role Objective
To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable
for the client’s ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for
consistent accuracy and an excellent review.
Data Analyst will provide feedback to client’s relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables
are expected.
Responsibilities
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling,
typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to ‘play’ with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported
language and English
Preferred Attributes
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc
Job Type: Full-time
Benefits:
401(k)
Health Insurance
Location:
Palo Alto, CA (Required)
Language:
Danish (Required)
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
This Company Describes Its Culture as:
Detail-oriented -- quality and precision-focused
Outcome-oriented -- results-focused with strong performance culture
Stable -- traditional, stable, strong processes
People-oriented -- supportive and fairness-focused
Team-oriented -- cooperative and collaborative
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
8 hour shift
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Job Description
Would you like to work with one of the highestrated employers in the US offering various great free perks?

We are currently seeking several experienced Jr. Software Data/Operations Analyst (Software Operations Associate) to be a key resource on a technical services teams. This is a 1 year (Extendable) contract position with in Mountain View, CA. (work location zip code: 94043). These are positions that will pay on a per hour W2 basis in accordance to the qualifications and experience of the candidate. Below is the job description as given to us by our client.

**Candidates must be able to work in the US without corporate sponsorship!**

Position Description

Jr. SW Operations Analyst /Software Quality Operations Associate

This is an entry-level position on our software quality operations team, which is responsible for ensuring the quality of self-driving car software. The team performs quality assurance on new software, reports bugs, and helps improve internal tools. This position provides a great opportunity to work directly with product managers, developers, and engineers, helping to bring to life an innovative product. A great candidate for this position has a curious, analytical mind, and enjoys gaining new knowledge on the go. She or he is dedicated to their work, quality-focused, can handle repetitive tasks, and is willing to take initiative and go the extra step to help the team. Collaboration and communicating effectively with teammates is important for this role. Team members may be asked to help with training and preparing training material or documentation. Preference for candidates in science, technology, physics, mathematics, statistics, engineering, data analysis or similar fields. New team members will be given extensive training on our internal tools and workflows upon hiring. She or he is expected to keep all project details confidential.

Summary of Duties:
Review and analyze testing data to identify problematic areas
Provide feedback to developers team
Create test scenarios
Work closely with engineers ensuring high quality of tests
Identify and report bugs
Keep track of issues.

Requirements:
BS/BA degree

Entry level to 5 years of experience

Deductive / Evaluative Reasoning!!!!!
Attention to detail
Willing to learn new skills

Nice to have:

Background or degree in science, technology, physics, mathematics, statistics, engineering, data analysis or similar fields
Company Description
Akorbi is a global company specializing in people, technology and language. We provide enterprise solutions to companies in various verticals, from sole proprietors to Fortune 500 companies. We are recognized as a Women's Business Enterprise, the 13th fastest growing woman-led companies and the 9th largest language service provider in the US.,German Speaking Data Analyst J707 – Cupertino, CA


We’re looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers. The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions. Work closely with the Data Analytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven marketing reports.
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.
Skills: Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling. Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus.

Reporting and presentation skills a must.

Education: 2 Years’ experience, Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent work experience preferred.

Read, Write and Speak German

For more information contact Jeanne jsharpe@anzuglobal.com

If this isn’t what you’re looking for maybe you could refer a colleague? We offer a referral bonus if your colleague is hired.,Employer: Vaco (Onsite Vendor for client)
Position: Data Analyst
Location: Palo Alto, CA
Role Objective
To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable
for the client’s ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for
consistent accuracy and an excellent review.
Data Analyst will provide feedback to client’s relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables
are expected.
Responsibilities
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling,
typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to ‘play’ with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported
language and English
Preferred Attributes
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc
Job Type: Full-time
Benefits:
401(k)
Health Insurance
Location:
Palo Alto, CA (Required)
Language:
Indonesian (Required)
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
This Company Describes Its Culture as:
Detail-oriented -- quality and precision-focused
Outcome-oriented -- results-focused with strong performance culture
Stable -- traditional, stable, strong processes
People-oriented -- supportive and fairness-focused
Team-oriented -- cooperative and collaborative
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
8 hour shift
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,POSITION SUMMARY –

Typical Tasks:

• Collaborates with vendors, administrators and owners of third-party databases to establish data mapping plans and methods, enabling the sharing of data;

• Develops computer testing and audit policies and assists end users in implementing auditing controls to ensure that defined, mission-critical interfaces are passing data accurately;

• Provides integration and interface design (data mapping, translation and transformation specifications) and architectural services for new and existing projects;

• Analyzes requirements from a technical standpoint and translates them into potential integration points, thereby defining the interface topology for the project;

• Coordinates and maintains electronic interface security;

• Develops data mapping, translation and transformation routines and methods utilizing interface engine toolset and standard query and database tools;

• Evaluates and tests emerging integration technologies

• Analyzes requirements and helps define integration and interface specifications;

• Builds, configures and maintains interfaces;

• Conducts testing of all mapping, translation and transformation routines prior to moving interfaces into production;

• Maintains technical artifacts, interface documentation, and topology diagrams;

• Performs analysis and troubleshooting of integration related issues;

• Maintains a library of all required standard vocabularies and nomenclatures used in normalizing inbound and outbound data feeds;

• Maintains test and production libraries of interfaces and applies appropriate methods, procedures and safeguards to protect the integrity of the interfaces and to ensure their recoverability;

• Performs other related duties as required.

Training and Experience:

Sufficient education, training, and experience to demonstrate the possession and direct application of the following knowledge and abilities.

• 6 years of experience with systems integration and building interfaces

• Minimum of 3 years developing Service Development in Software AG web Methods required

• Familiarity working with an AGILE task management

• Technical writing experience a plus

• Strong analytical and quantitative skills

• Self-Motivated and can effectively multi-task

• Experience performance tuning, supporting, and troubleshooting software AG web Methods is plus

Possession of a Bachelor's degree from an accredited college in Computer Science, Information Technology, Mathematics, Engineering, or a related field

Knowledge of:

• Industry-specific systems, data manipulation and data transport mechanisms, standards, and protocols;

• Interface standards and protocols, including but not limited to HTML, ASCII;

• Inbound and outbound data integration involving XML, XSLT, JSON and other structured data being transmitted via FTP, API or web services;

• Electronic interface security;

• Data mapping, translation and transformation routines and methods;

• Interface engines and building interfaces on interface engines;

• Interface engines and platforms (i.e. Software AG WebMethods, NextGen Mirth, Corepoint, Orion, Infor, etc.)

• Requirements that define interface specifications;

• Building, configuring and maintaining interfaces;

• Interface testing;

• Technical artifacts, interface documentation, and topology diagrams;

• Analysis and troubleshooting of integration related issues;

• Methods, procedures and safeguards to protect the integrity of the interfaces and to ensure their recoverability.

• Quality of product and service

• Timeliness of performance

• Depth of knowledge

• Interpersonal and communication skills

• Project management skills

• Experience, qualifications, and ability to meet the needs of this engagement,Employer: Vaco (Onsite Vendor for client)
Position: Data Analyst
Location: Palo Alto, CA
Role Objective
To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable
for the client’s ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for
consistent accuracy and an excellent review.
Data Analyst will provide feedback to client’s relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables
are expected.
Responsibilities
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling,
typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to ‘play’ with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported
language and English
Preferred Attributes
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc
Job Type: Full-time
Benefits:
401(k)
Health Insurance
Location:
Palo Alto, CA (Required)
Language:
Finnish (Required)
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
This Company Describes Its Culture as:
Detail-oriented -- quality and precision-focused
Outcome-oriented -- results-focused with strong performance culture
Stable -- traditional, stable, strong processes
People-oriented -- supportive and fairness-focused
Team-oriented -- cooperative and collaborative
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
8 hour shift
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,KAYGEN is an emerging leader in providing top talent for technology based staffing services. We specialize in providing high-volume contingent staffing, direct hire staffing and project based solutions to companies worldwide ranging from startups to Fortune 500 and Managed Service Providers (MSP) across a wide variety of industries

Responsibilities:
Translate business requirements into tangible solution specifications and high quality, on time deliverables.
Partner with different stakeholders and execute proof of concepts to assess the value of solutions.
Should be able to do reverse engineering to understand and derive the functional knowledge
Experience in end to end development of a new set of reports, dashboards & KPI Scorecards
Analyze large volumes of transactional data to generate insights and actionable recommendations to drive business growth.
Automate data analysis and insight generation.
Collaborate with other team members and lead project development.
Passion for knowing for emerging trends and identifying relevant opportunities.
Demonstrate ability to think strategically about business, product, and technical challenges
Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization
Analytical/Problem Solving skills.
Apply quality control, data validation, and cleansing processes to new and existing data sources.
Support User Acceptance Testing for production applications
Support a high-performance workplace
Self-motivated with a proven track record of innovation and successful delivery.
Ability to work independently, fast paced and deadline-driven environment.
Excellent communication, presentation and Analytical skills
Drive customer communication during critical events and participate/lead various operational improvement initiatives.
Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera
Knowledge of ETL and expertise in any BI tools Power BI, Tableau, SFDC Einstein Analytics, QlikSense, Qlikview, OBIEE, SAP Analytics Cloud, Kibanaetc.,
Strong Tableau Administration and dashboard migration experience
Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage.
Hands-on experience in data modelling, programming, querying, data mining and report development using large volumes of granular data to deliver business intelligence and custom reporting solutions
Determining methods and procedures on new assignments, establishing these for the assignment and coordinating activities with other employees while leading a small team.
Contributing to your Department by
Documenting your learnings from the current work to produce an artifact such as an internal Wiki, a blog or a best practices document
Actively participating in Department level group activities and events related to learning, formal training, interviewing, special projects, knowledge sharing etc.
Qualifications:

What you get to do in this role:
You will be the cross-functional business leader and Product Owner for our Product Master Data and Product Hierarchy Strategy including operational processes, attribute management, and data governance best practices
Lead cross-functional consolidation of product master data business requirements, use cases, and business rules
Define and drive appropriate data policies and standards of product data governance
Define and facilitate education and training of product master data governance processes and best practices
Strategically analyze product master data quality issues and drive appropriate actions with data operations and business process teams
Define and track metrics to communicate data related business value/outcomes KPIs (compliance, risk, efficiency, cost, revenue, and quality)
Help unlock significant business value from our product master data assets


In order to be successful in this role, we need someone who has:
8+ years of experience
Exceptional communication skills appropriate to all levels of the company
Exceptional attention to detail, organization and analytical skills
Experience and deep understanding of Master Data and Hierarchy management principals and best practices is a must
Experience with Product Master or knowledge of PLM processes, product master data attributes, product hierarchy, BOM, license terms and derivatives
Ability to understand business processes, integrations, and pain-points to lead the definition of data requirements to meet complex business needs and drive data quality
Strong analytical skills and data curiosity to analyze data and work directly with business stakeholders to define business rules and processes to drive data quality.
Experience data profiling, identify the root cause of data problems and help drive closed-loop corrective action process
Ability and experience partnering with IT to define and implement master data management capabilities
Possesses and communicates passion and energy for data strategy and quality
Ability to organize, lead, and facilitate cross-functional meetings with executive stakeholders
At KAYGEN, we are always looking for dynamic, talented and experienced individuals. We invite you to join our team of talented IT professionals, consulting at client locations across the globe. Our culture is team-orientated; we strive to stand by our core values of respect, honesty and integrity. Our team of experienced staffing experts will work with you to find you the best opportunity. For more information please visit us at www.kaygen.com.,Role Title: Data Analyst/Data Specialist

INDUSTRY: Federal

ROLES: Jr. Data Analyst

LOCATION: Remote Work

DURATION: 9 months + Budgeted extension(s) per year

START DATE: Client is ready to onboard asap after government card is collected by you.

About Project:

· Support the government agency for entring Data of Applicants for keeping compliances of claims and entring the data in there system .

· This role will assist with data entry of information submitted in scanned forms into a government database.

· The work will be done at the Deloitte office in Austin TX after the businesses are open.

Education: High school diploma minimum requirement with college degree preferred.

Required Skills:

· General use of computer skills required.

· General ability to review information and data found on a form, and type that data into a database with associated fields already established.

· Efficient in entering data and reviewing numerous applications in 40 hours per week.

· Project demands team members to be committed to this job for a long term contract.

Desired: Experience in data entry preferred but not required.
US Citizen Required.
W2 - Only.

Day-to-day:

· First week after onboarding- complete training will be provided by Project Managers.

· Introduction to the team of professional Data/Pension Specialts

· After training is completed- The position requires you to do complete reviewing of aaplicants data and entering the required data of government forms and claim submissions into the federal system.

· It's a day long sitting job and entering data to fed system

· If you are a fit and energetic person, passion to grow in database role with a team of professionals govt representatives.

Apply today

Regards,

Sukhmani Kaur- Account Manager
Email: sukh@arksolutionsinc.com

Team: Vishal Sinha - Recruiter
Phone: 571-200-8641 ; Email: vishal@arksolutionsinc.com

Shane Dawson - Recruiter
Phone: 571 474-1369 ; Email: shane@arksolutionsinc.com,Job Number: R0084389 Data Analyst, Lead
Key Role:
Serve as a Data Analyst to develop and influence long-term BI strategy, analytics, tools roadmap, and self-service reporting capabilities and drive the implementation end-to-end. Create and deliver metrics, reporting platforms and analytical models critical for tracking and managing the business, including build reports, dashboards, and other data representation models from scratch. Turn business requirements into technical requirements, find and understand the correct data sources for a given analysis, learn from and share knowledge and expertise with your teammates to grow the BI's total impact to the organization. Document your code, framework standards, and team processes and drive insights through rigorous analytics on business performance and cohesive presentation of the data and recommendations. Create dashboards with KPIs for a variety of stakeholders. Drive organizational change through a period of high growth and build the systems and infrastructure to support that growth. Basic Qualifications:
-8+ years of experience in an enterprise environment with commercial software development or business intelligence
-Experience with using Power BI and SQL
-Experience with technical leadership
-Ability to focus on MVP and shipping software while remaining cognizant of the long-term costs of technical debt
-Ability to obtain a security clearance
-HS diploma or GED required Additional Qualifications:
-Experience in working with healthcare data
-Experience with leading a successful team of at least 5
-Experience with CRM, including MS Dynamics or SalesForce
-Experience with data movement and management in the cloud using a combination of Azure or AWS features
-Ability to display high emotional intelligence
-Possession of excellent oral and written communication skills Clearance:
Applicants selected will be subject to a security investigation and may need to meet eligibility requirements for access to classified information. We're an EOE that empowers our people-no matter their race, color, religion, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other protected characteristic-to fearlessly drive change. #LI-AH1,You…

As a Data Warehouse Analyst you will be responsible for data design, database architecture, metadata and repository creation in a data warehouse environment.

Us…

We were founded as a fresh alternative in the Government Consulting Community and are dedicated to the belief that results are a product of analytical thinking, agile design principles and that solutions are built in collaboration with, not for, our customers. This mantra drives us to succeed and act as true partners in advancing our client’s missions.

Program Mission…

The project you will be working on is an existing cloud-based information technology infrastructure to host mission systems, applications, services, and data. While the current environment exists as an enterprise enabling platform, the end state of the environment is to enable Army leaders at every echelon to make fully informed, data driven decisions, based on authoritative and/or production data sources. Our approach is to transform legacy applications to be cloud native and reside on a Platform as a Service (PaaS). Additionally, modernize current applications by breaking them down into loosely coupled micro-services, and leveraging a continuous integration / continuous delivery pipeline to enable an agile DevOps Strategy.

What we'd like to see...
Reviews data loaded into the data warehouse for accuracy.
Responsible for the development, maintenance and support of an enterprise data warehouse system and corresponding data marts.
Troubleshoots and tunes existing data warehouse applications.
Conducts research into new data warehouse applications and determines viability for adoption.
Assists in establishing development standards.
Evaluates existing subject areas stored in the data warehouse.
Incorporates existing subject areas into an enterprise model.
Creates new or enhanced components of the data warehouse.
Current IAT I Certification (A+ CE, Network+, CCNA, SSCP).
Desired Skills:
Works with considerable freedom to make decisions on the techniques and approaches to be used.
Prepares recommendations for system improvement for management and user consideration.
Years of Experience: 3 years of experience or more

Education: Associates Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, or other closely related discipline

Clearance: Active Secret Security Clearance Required,Organization: Accenture Federal Services

Location: Charlotte, NC

Accenture Federal Services, a wholly owned subsidiary of Accenture LLP, is a U.S. company with offices in Arlington, Virginia. Accenture's federal business has served every cabinet-level department and 30 of the largest federal organizations. Accenture Federal Services transforms bold ideas into breakthrough outcomes for clients at defense, intelligence, public safety, civilian and military health organizations.

We believe that great outcomes are everything. It's what drives us to turn bold ideas into breakthrough solutions. By combining digital technologies with what works across the world's leading businesses, we use agile approaches to help clients solve their toughest problems fast-the first time. So, you can deliver what matters most.

Count on us to help you embrace new ways of working, building for change and put customers at the core. A wholly owned subsidiary of Accenture, we bring over 30 years of experience serving the federal government, including every cabinet-level department. Our 7,200 dedicated colleagues and change makers work with our clients at the heart of the nation's priorities in defense, intel, public safety, health and civilian to help you make a difference for the people you employ, serve and protect.

The Data Analyst will have a thorough understanding of the logical and physical data models behind both the operational and analytic data store.,Hello Associates,

*****Greetings from Conch Technologies*****
Position:ÂData Analyst

Location: Charlotte, NC

Length:ÂÂ12 â 24 monthÂ

Â

ÂSkills Required:

Â
6Â+ years of Data Analyst experience
MUST have previousÂWholesale Customer DataÂexperience
Most of this role will be Data Mapping
SQL
Must be able to doÂSQL codeÂwhen data mapping
Banking experience
Â

Thank you
Gopichand
Recruiter - Conch Technologies, Inc
Ph: +1(928)9234539
E:ÂGopichand@conchtech.com
Conch Technologies, Inc |Âwww.conchtech.com,U.S. Citizens and those authorized to work in the U.S. are encouraged to apply. We are unable to sponsor at this time. Vaco is seeking a talented Data Engineer to join an innovative Data Analytics team here in the Charlotte area. You will be working with a team to meet data requirements and create data pipelines and dashboards. Responsibilities Troubleshoot data issues reported from customers and internal team Collect data to onboard new and existing customers Acquire data from different data sources including database, csvexcel files gather and maintain data requirements Collaborate with teams to ensure on-time implementation and deployment of the analytical software product Work closely with teams to understand their analytical needs, including identifying critical metrics and KPIs for the product and implementations, and deliver actionable insights to relevant decision-makers Work with internal team and external customers to develop analytics for uncovering insights from data and problem-solving, and develop data dashboard to assist decision-making Develop Tableau analytics and dashboards according to customer needs and internal requirements Present findings, or translate the data into an understandable and actionable document. Required Qualifications Proven working experience as a data analyst or business data analyst Experience with Python highly preferred Strong knowledge of and experience with data analytics tool (Tableau, Excel), databases (SQL, Postgres, etc) Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information and hypothesize ideas and prove them Strong attention to detail and accuracy Strong organization communication skills Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings Bachelor's degree Preferred Qualifications Experience with ETL tools U.S. Citizens and those authorized to work in the U.S. are encouraged to apply. We are unable to sponsor at this time.,RGP is a global consulting firm helping some of the most recognized companies in the world work differently. Our success comes from a shared belief in rolling up our sleeves and doing the hard work of solving complex challenges, executing plans and implementing technology to help transform organizations.

Working as a consultant you will be connected to work that matters, putting your expertise to its best use while developing skills for the future. The result is a career defined by you, supported by RGP and built on tangible accomplishments.

As we continue to grow and deepen our impact on organizations around the world, we are looking for the right people to join us on our mission. If you are interested in being part of our team, there are a few things you should know:
We are energized by challenges and the effort needed to solve them.
We like working with people who are positive, adaptable and growth-minded.
We care how work gets accomplished and are deeply invested in the success of our clients and our colleagues.
If this sounds like you, we invite you to read on and learn more.
THE RGP CONSULTING EXPERIENCE
RGP has a unique consulting model that provides opportunities for consultants to work in different ways. Most consultants work in a model where they have the flexibility and autonomy to choose projects aligning to their experience, skills and desired lifestyle. Other opportunities exist in team-based, strategy and solutions work. In all models, you will feel the full support of RGP to assist you in your work and guide you on your chosen path.
PURPOSE OF THE ROLE
As a Data Analyst, you will assist business leaders in making improved business decisions through the analysis of large data sets, creation of comprehensive reports and informed recommendations.

ATTRIBUTES OF CONSULTANTS WITH RGP
Respect for people and opinions and confidently offer your point-of-view with clients and among colleagues
A drive for proactively cultivating relationships with clients and colleagues
Optimism when faced with challenges and complex situations, coupled with the drive to solve client issues
Dedication to continuous improvement and development of your skillset and talents
A strong personal identification with RGPs values loyalty, integrity, focus, enthusiasm, accountability and talent
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ROLE
Analyze, manipulate, profile and extracts large data sets
Assist with documenting requirements
Build, review and modify data reports
Transfer knowledge to client team members to enable them to be self-sufficient in building and maintaining reports to address future needs
DESIRED EXPERIENCE AND REQUIREMENTS
Bachelors Degree in Finance, Accounting, MIS or other related business discipline required
5 to 10 years of data analysis experience
Strong understanding of financial statements and the interrelationship of the income statement, balance sheet and statement of cash flows, including account reconciliation and financial analysis skills
Excellent interpersonal communication skills
Capable of working independently; a self-starter
Experience with SAP or Oracle software required, including the ability to access reports and data as needed
Intermediate to Advanced Excel skills required, including strong data retrieval and downloading abilities, and proficiency with macros, PowerBI, PowerPivot, etc.
Technical capability in one or more of the following: SQL, Tableau, QlikView, Cognos, ERWin, etc. strongly preferred

Equal Opportunity Employer
RGP is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer and committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, genetic information or veteran status, and encourage all applicants to apply.,Hello Associates,

*****Greetings from Conch Technologies*****

Â

Job Title : Data Analyst (Real Time Data Consultant Needed)

Length: 12+ Months Contract

Location:ÂCharlotte, NC

Â

Â 5+ years of Data Analytics SPECIFICALLY working with RTD (Real Time Date)

Â Python coding experience

Â Education is important so ideally someone with a higher level Education focused in Data Analytics would be preferred

Â Tableau would be a big plus!

Â
Â

--
With Regards,
Â
NageshÂGÂ
Mobile:Â901-443-9877
Desk:Â901-313-3066
Email:Ânagesh@conchtech.com
Web:Âwww.conchtech.comÂ,Job Description The Data Visualization Analyst will assist in the company data analytics architecture operations in developing analytical reporting and insightful dashboard solutions. They will further assist in data sourcing, cleansing, wrangling, blending, integration and analytics. Provides clear, continuous, and consistent data analytics in projects as well as in ad-hoc analysis Queries data sources, analyzes data, identifies correlations, patterns, clustering and then builds polished reports and dashboard solutions across the organization as well as identified gaps in master data, transactional data Assist in defining and managing standards, guidelines, and processes to ensure data quality Develop business acumen and use analytics for critical evaluation of gaps and opportunities Assists in acquiring data from primary and secondary data sources and improve maintain databases Requirements Bachelor's Degree in Business AdministrationManagement, Analytics, Computer Science or related field required 5+ years of hands-on experience in visualization, data modeling and analytics 5+ years of business experience with exposure to strategy formulation andor business analytics Ability to definedesign dashboards and reports of data supported KPIs and benchmarks for audiences with all levels of technical expertise Intermediate understanding of system skills required to maintaindesign SQL databases and an evolving Data Warehouse environment Intermediate understanding of at least one SQL language with the ability to write, interpret and document complex queries Must have proven high-quality internal external customer service skills Excellent interpersonal skills confidence in speaking with executive leaders,Overview

IMPAQ International, a growing and dynamic social science research firm, provides high-quality research and impact evaluation services, policy analysis, survey research, technology solutions, organizational development, technical assistance and consulting services to U.S. and international government agencies, foundations, and the private sector. IMPAQ's mission is to bring together exceptional people to develop innovative and rigorous approaches to evaluate the real-world impact of social policies and programs. IMPAQ has a diverse and collegial work environment and is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer (M/F/Disability/Veterans).

IMPAQ is seeking a full-time Data Analyst who will support the senior research team in conducting research and evaluation projects primarily in the area of Health (e.g., government health care programs, such as Medicare/Medicaid).

Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the U.S. on a full-time basis. Employment-based visa sponsorship (including H-1B sponsorship) is not available for this position

Responsibilities
Apply quantitative methods and techniques to manage and analyze research data
Construct, clean, and document large datasets for both internal and project-related use
Conduct literature reviews of technical and professional publications
Create customized and presentation-quality reports from data analysis results
Participate in the design of research studies
Manage administrative aspects of projects
Support the preparation of technical procedures and reports
Write, compile, and edit assigned portions of proposals and project reports
Review work products to ensure quality and consistency of content
Qualifications
Bachelor's or Master's degree in Economics, Mathematics, Statistics or related quantitative field
0-3 years quantitative research experience in economics, health, education, public policy, or related fields
Must have experience in data analysis using SAS, SQL, Excel, and/or other statistical and data analytics software
Knowledge of data analysis and data management techniques
Proposal and report preparation experience a plus
Skills
Quantitative and qualitative research skills
Good oral and written communication skills
Strong organizational skills required
Ability to learn quickly, take direction, and work independently
Ability to take collaborative and consultative approaches to resolve issues
Creative, professional, and able to take initiative
IMPAQ International, LLC is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer (M/F/Disability/Veterans).,RGP is a global consulting firm helping some of the most recognized companies in the world work differently. Our success comes from a shared belief in rolling up our sleeves and doing the hard work of solving complex challenges, executing plans and implementing technology to help transform organizations.

Working as a consultant you will be connected to work that matters, putting your expertise to its best use while developing skills for the future. The result is a career defined by you, supported by RGP and built on tangible accomplishments.

As we continue to grow and deepen our impact on organizations around the world, we are looking for the right people to join us on our mission. If you are interested in being part of our team, there a few things you should know:
We are energized by challenges and the effort needed to solve them.
We like working with people who are positive, adaptable and growth-minded.
We care how work gets accomplished and are deeply invested in the success of our clients and our colleagues.
If this sounds like you, we invite you to read on and learn more.
THE RGP CONSULTING EXPERIENCE
RGP has a unique consulting model that provides opportunities for consultants to work in different ways. Most consultants work in a model where they have the flexibility and autonomy to choose projects aligning to their experience, skills and desired lifestyle. Other opportunities exist in team-based, strategy and solutions work. In all models, you will feel the full support of RGP to assist you in your work and guide you on your chosen path.
PURPOSE OF THE ROLE
As a Data Analyst, you will assist business leaders in making improved business decisions through the analysis of large data sets, creation of comprehensive reports and informed recommendations.

ATTRIBUTES OF CONSULTANTS WITH RGP
Respect for people and opinions and confidently offer your point-of-view with clients and among colleagues
A drive for proactively cultivating relationships with clients and colleagues
Optimism when faced with challenges and complex situations, coupled with the drive to solve client issues
Dedication to continuous improvement and development of your skillset and talents
A strong personal identification with RGPs values loyalty, integrity, focus, enthusiasm, accountability and talent
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ROLE
Analyze, manipulate, profile and extracts large data sets
Assist with documenting requirements
Build, review and modify data reports
Transfer knowledge to client team members to enable them to be self-sufficient in building and maintaining reports to address future needs
DESIRED EXPERIENCE AND REQUIREMENTS
Bachelors Degree in Finance, Accounting, MIS or other related business discipline required
5 to 10 years of data analysis experience
Strong understanding of financial statements and the interrelationship of the income statement, balance sheet and statement of cash flows, including account reconciliation and financial analysis skills
Excellent interpersonal communication skills
Capable of working independently; a self-starter
Experience with SAP or Oracle software required, including the ability to access reports and data as needed
Intermediate to Advanced Excel skills required, including strong data retrieval and downloading abilities, and proficiency with macros, PowerBI, PowerPivot, etc.
Technical capability in one or more of the following: SQL, Tableau, QlikView, Cognos, ERWin, etc. strongly preferred
Equal Opportunity Employer
RGP is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer and committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, genetic information or veteran status, and encourage all applicants to apply.,Position Data Analyst Location Reston VA Job description Demonstrated problem solving, research, and detailed analysis skills, with the ability to understand logicissues and develop solutions. Experience in Data Analysis using MicroStrategy or Tableau Hands-on experience with STTM, Interface Control Documentation and other aspects of Data Governance Experience working with software developers in a medium to large organization following SDLC or Agile processes Must have experience supporting customer application development lifecycles (e.g., analysis, design, testing) Experience providing input to specialists in development projects to assist in developing specifications and functionalities in IT systems. Strong verbal and written communication skills Ability to communicate abstract concepts and analysis results using creative visualizations. Comfortable presenting and relaying information to anyone including upper management. Excellent interpersonal skills and team player mentality Excellent analytic and problem-solving skills Ability to develop proficiency in new skills rapidly Position Lead Data Analyst Location San Francisco CA Breakdown of Day to Day tasks 30 Meeting business stakeholders to gatherdiscuss business requirements 20 Business systems and data analysis 20 DocumentingBuilding technical specification 30 Working with engineering team development satisfies business functional requirements Top 3 hard skills, stack ranked Business systems analysis, data analysis (Teradata, Oracle, Hadoop), problem-solving Data modeling data solutions architecture Communication skills What is going to make someone stand out as the best Bachelorrsquos degree in computer science or engineering discipline with a strong quantitative aptitude Ability to work with business leads, business stakeholders, subject matter experts and technical staff to gather and develop business needs in the form of technical requirements Identifying and refining current and futurestate business processes by performing deep dive analysis of current state and propose future state solutions effectively using clear and precise documentation Motivation to understand business processes and data platforms in order to designdeliver scalable data solutions to support customer needs Good understanding of database principles and advanced SQL in order to perform complex analysis Expert understanding of data modelling concepts, experience with data modelling and generating metadata to support relational non-relational database implementations experience building logical and physical data models. Good understanding of distributed systems (Teradata, Hadoop), data movement and optimizing ETL processing of extremely large datasets with specified SLAs. Collaborate closely with engineering team and provide ongoing support to help implement end user requirements Ensure the consistency and quality of data solutions completed by engineering team. Prior knowledge of any analytical visualization tools like Tableau, MSTR is desirable Document data solutions for easy business consumption. Strong communication skills, both written and verbal, and skilled at adjusting communication stylevocabulary to an audiencersquos rolefunction and technical familiarity How will you determine if the individual is performing well? Documentation of requirementsneeds gathered from business teams Communicationsupdates to management and project team members Functional specs and other documentation given as requirements to engineering teams Ability to identify and communicate effort, risks and dependencies to project team membersstakeholders Relationships with business users and technical teams Delivery of high quality solutions meeting business requirements,We have an immediate opportunity for Business Data analyst on (100%) REMOTE.

The ideal candidate will have experience with Data Analysis/Manipulation skills in Excel along with Data Visualization in any BI tool (top preference is Tableau). The candidate will Assess current application capabilities within the data domain against target Enterprise Data Governance Policy compliance requirements; responsible for or contribute to the development of a plan and roadmap to implement required capabilities.

** All successful candidates for this position are required to work directly for PRIMUS. **

For immediate consideration, please contact;
Steffi
PRIMUS Global Services
972 753-6500 x 240
jobs@primusglobal.com,ZS is a professional services firm that works side by side with companies to help develop and deliver products that drive customer value and company results. From R&D to portfolio strategy, customer insights, marketing and sales strategy, operations and technology, we leverage our deep industry expertise and leading-edge analytics to create solutions that work in the real world. Our most valuable asset is our people—a fact that’s reflected in our values-driven organization in which new perspectives are integral and new ideas are celebrated. ZSers are passionately committed to helping companies and their customers thrive in industries ranging from healthcare and life sciences, to high-tech, financial services, travel and transportation, and beyond.

SENIOR BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY ANALYST

The Solution Delivery team implements technology based solutions in the areas of business intelligence, analytics, information management, reporting and mobility. In addition, this team configures ZS’s proprietary software used to streamline business processes for commercial groups at client organizations. This team takes overall ownership of the delivery of the technical solution leading the design and development phases and collaborating with other teams for business requirements and system testing

Responsibilities:

• Lead design and development phases during implementation of world-class technology solutions to solve business problems across multiple client engagements;
• Partner with program lead to build comprehensive implementation project plans with well-defined tasks and owners;
• Leverage information from requirements-gathering phase and utilize past experience to design a flexible and scalable solution;
• Apply appropriate development methodologies (e.g.: agile, waterfall) and best practices (e.g.: mid-development client reviews, embedded QA procedures, unit testing) to ensure successful and timely completion;
• Collaborate with other team members (involved in the requirements gathering, testing, roll-out and operations phases) to ensure seamless transitions.
• Communicate business requirements & work closely with development teams to ensure accurate understanding and implementation;
• Lead the development of project outputs such as business case development, solution vision and design, user requirements, solution mockup, prototypes, and technical architecture (if needed), test cases, and deployment plans;
• Help lead user adoption and change management activities during inception, UAT and post implementation phases.

Qualifications:

• Bachelor's/Master's degree with specialization in Computer Science, MIS, IT or other computer related disciplines;
• 4-6 years of relevant consulting-industry experience working on medium-large scale technology solution delivery engagements;
• Extensive experience working with Reltio, Informatica or other MDM software
• Manage team of analyst across different development skill-sets (Front-end user reporting, Back-end database management, ETL interfacing).

Additional skills:
• Deep understanding of data management best practices and data analytics
• Up to speed with latest technologies in reporting, data warehousing, and data management
• Ability to lead requirements sessions with clients and project teams;
• Excellent verbal and written communication, organization, planning and leadership skills;
• Ability to distill complex concepts into easy-to-understand frameworks and presentations
• Strong leadership, verbal and written communication skills with ability to articulate results and issues to internal and client teams
• Proven ability to work creatively and analytically in a problem-solving environment
• Ability to work within a virtual global team environment and contribute to the overall timely delivery of multiple projects
• Willingness to travel to other global offices as needed to work with client or other internal project teams.

ZS is a global consulting firm; fluency in English is required, additional fluency in at least one European or Asian language is desirable.
Candidates must possess work authorization for their intended country of employment. An on-line application, including a cover letter expressing interest and a full set of transcripts (official or unofficial), is required to be considered.
ZS offers a competitive compensation package with salary and bonus incentives, complete medical/dental/life insurance programs and retirement savings benefits. We are an Equal Opportunity Employer.
NO AGENCY CALLS, PLEASE.

Connect with ZS on social media:
Like ZS Careers on Facebook
Follow ZS Careers on Twitter and Instagram
Follow ZS on LinkedIn for more job opportunities
Subscribe to the ZS YouTube channel
Explore the Life at ZS blog
ZS has been recognized globally for its expertise in consulting and its flexible work environment. View ZS’s accolades.,Overview

IMPAQ International, a growing and dynamic social science research firm, provides high-quality research and impact evaluation services, policy analysis, survey research, technology solutions, organizational development, technical assistance and consulting services to U.S. and international government agencies, foundations, and the private sector. IMPAQ's mission is to bring together exceptional people to develop innovative and rigorous approaches to evaluate the real-world impact of social policies and programs. IMPAQ has a diverse and collegial work environment and is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer (M/F/Disability/Veterans).

Our IMPAQ Health division houses a voluminous and diverse portfolio of health and health economics projects for the Federal Government and other clients. The Senior Data Analyst - Health Care Innovation will participate in research activities such as conducting literature reviews, designing the methodology for the operations and evaluation of alternative payment and delivery models, and conducting big-data analysis of Medicare, Medicaid, and private payer health care claims. Individuals selected for this position will be mentored by our senior health economists.

Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the U.S. on a full-time basis. Employment-based visa sponsorship (including H-1B sponsorship) is not available for this position.

Responsibilities

Design and conduct research projects, including:
Processing and analyzing large health care related datasets.
Developing methodological designs.
Performing a variety of advanced quantitative analyses.
Writing technical reports and proposals.
Making presentations to government clients.
Qualifications

Education, Knowledge and Experience
MA with 4+ years of experience
Subject matter expertise in health care topics.
Understanding of the complexities associated with the analysis of large health care datasets such as Medicare/Medicaid claims data
Proficiency with Microsoft Office and statistical packages such as SAS, STATA, and R.
Expertise in SQL and Python is a plus
Expertise in quantitative techniques such as econometrics (e.g., multivariate regression analysis), creation of comparison groups, artificial intelligence methods, factor analysis, and small area estimation
Experience preparing reports and proposals.
Experience in process analysis, evaluation, and experimental research design activities.
Skills
Strong quantitative and qualitative skills.
Ability to think strategically about research questions and programs.
Ability to lead major aspects of a project.
Excellent ability to communicate complex technical material, both orally and in writing.
Strong writing and editing skills
Ability to balance multiple priorities and meet critical deadlines.
IMPAQ International, LLC is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer (M/F/Disability/Veterans).,Position Role/Tile: Technical Business Analyst with SQL Data Specialist
Location: Walnut Creek, CA.

Scope of Responsibilities:

• Leads project stakeholders in the analysis process, interacting to elicit and document project requirements.
• Produces professional quality project artifacts including but not limited to business requirements documents, use cases, issue logs, test cases and other documents as needed.
• Documents requirements and works with technical teams to provide solutions to promote data integrity in enterprise systems.
• Serves as a critical resource and liaison between subject matter experts and technical experts throughout the project lifecycle.
• Assists in the estimates of time required to deliver project artifacts and reports progress toward delivery goals throughout project.
• Identifies and communicates both risks and solutions.
• Participates in the testing, QA and training of a product.
• Assist in application support and management of defects, enhancements and change requests.
• Able to work across programs and on multiple parallel tasks.
• Demonstrated ability to function as a thought leader.

Requirements (Must):
• Minimum of 8 years of Technical Business Analysis or equivalent experience.
• Minimum of 2 years of hands-on experience with writing simple SQL Server queries and handling data requirements.
• Understanding of Information Management, Big Data concepts and practices.
• Bachelor's degree required; Master's degree preferred.
• Business Analysis, PMP, Agile Certifications a plus.
Health Care or engineering experience preferred.

Central Business Solutions, Inc,
37600 Central Ct.
Suite #214
Newark, CA 94560,Job Description:

o Demonstrated Experience in documenting data lineage
o Experience creating/contributing to a data dictionary, a plus
o Experience using DeNodo, a plus,Summary: The Data Analyst (BA) will assist project management teams with requirements gathering, documentation, analyzing risks, and keeping track of timelines, milestones, and deliverables. They will analyze metrics and create reports to support business tasks and provide information and communication to all team members and stakeholders.Must be eligible to work in the U.S. No sponsorships are available at this time.Essential Duties:Attend weekly meetings to update project progress using appropriate toolsAssess impacts to project scheduleDevelop documents, metrics and reports as they relate to the health of the projectProvide expertise to stakeholdersReview deliverables for quality assuranceRequired Skills:Logic and reasoning through the use of critical thinking skillsAbility to find solutions using problem solving skillsAbility to write detailed documentation as it relate to the health of the projectClear and concise verbal communication with all levels of project staffAbility to examine and provide a detailed analysis of project needsProven attention to detail and the ability to analyze large sets of dataEducation and Experience:Bachelor's degree in Business, Mathematics or a related field2+ years of experience working in a Data Analyst roleExpertise using MS ExcelPhysical Requirements & Environmental Conditions:These physical demands must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Employee is regularly required to talk or hear, sit, stand and utilize technology tools such as a laptop computer for extended periods of time. Specific vision abilities include close vision, and the ability to adjust focus. This position requires the ability to occasionally lift up to 20 lbs. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.Briljent will not discriminate against any employee or applicant on the basis of age, color, marital status, race, religion, veteran status, disability (in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act), sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or national origin or other status as protected by applicable law. Briljent will not discriminate against employees or applicants who inquire about, discuss, or disclose their compensation or the compensation of other employees or applicants.Briljent https://briljent.hirecentric.com,Full Time - Lakewood, Colorado

We are seeking an entry-level Business Data Analyst to work at our federal customer site in Lakewood, Colorado and to join our collaborative, innovative, customer-centric culture. If you have basic knowledge in technical fields including but not limited to finance, accounting, information technology, research and analysis, or other program support fields, then please read on!

Specific tasks include but are not limited to the following
Works in support of the general management and business operation of a particular program, department, or office.
Provides analysis and research for specific projects.
Supports managers and a variety of tasks and projects to meet deadlines.
Continuously exercises discretion and independent judgment on the analysis, planning, and/or implementation of important program initiatives.
Qualifications
Your Experience
Must be a U.S. Citizen
Associate’s Degree or equivalent experience. Equivalent experience includes:
4+ years’ experience supporting program analysis activities with no related degree; OR
2+ years’ experience supporting program analysis activities with related Associate’s Degree; OR
No experience with a related BA or BS degree.
Specializes in one or more of the following areas: tax; finance; accounting; budgeting; auditing; quality control; research; legal and regulatory compliance; administration, and other similar management and operational activities.
Superior customer service, interpersonal, and communication skills.
Ability to take the initiative and use independent judgment.
Preferred
Has a Public Trust Clearance
Why Consider This Opportunity
Great benefit package with benefits that start on date of hire.
401 (k) employer match, with 100% immediate vesting.
Work environment where you have a lot of independence.
Ability to work with a purpose and make an impact.
Work with a Manager and peers that are passionate about customers.
Work for an employer where core values are not just written on paper but lived.,Technical Lead - I-Data Analyst 7 - 10 yrs US Brentwood TN partner Location Denver, CO Exp 7 yrs Plus Rate 55hr Skills SQL,Microsoft SQL Server,Python,SQL Server Location US Brentwood TN Positions 1 Experience 7.0 - 10.0 Years Key Skill Microsoft SQL Server Mandatory Skills SQL Desired Skills SQL, Python Job Description "Expertise in data analyst and SQL, Creative thinker bull Strong with SQL bull Preferably with some Python experience bull Ideally someone who is very strong on the Data Analysis side bull Slice and dice data bull Work closely with Data Scientists",Job Title:
Data Base Programmer/Analyst
Apply Print

Location: Denver
CO
Required Skills:
designing, implementing, conversion, validating, supporting tools, hardware and software configurations, explanations and documenta
Job Description:
Seeking an on-site, qualified Data Base Programmer/ Analyst for Information Management System's development teams. This is a staff augmentation to support the reengineering and implementation of organization and school directory dimensions.
This engagement includes designing, implementing, conversion and validating the reengineering of the current organization and school directory dimensions.
In addition, this work may involve additional work associated with the staging of data for Tableau and Cognos reporting purposes.
This initiative is critical for IMS support of Tableau and Cognos reporting. We need a data warehousing expert that, can quickly ramp up on the environment, understands the work needed, can do the work, can communicate to others how to do the work, and support IMS in the effort to independently support the organization and school dimensions.
We need explanations and documentation throughout This includes any supporting tools, hardware and software configurations using best practices in all areas.