Data Analyst Jersey City, NJ 12+ months contract Extensive experience in Data Analysis Experience in profiling the data (data gaps, data quality etc) Discoveringcreating data dictionary Creating specifications Experience in data governance tools is a plus,About Capgemini
Capgemini is a global leader in consulting, digital transformation, technology and engineering services. The Group is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50-year+ heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. Today, it is a multicultural company of 270,000 team members in almost 50 countries. With Altran, the Group reported 2019 combined revenues of €17billion.
Visit us at www.capgemini.com. People matter, results count.
Job Description
Title: Data Analyst
Location: Jersey City, NJ
Type: Full-time
Conversion IT lead and Data Analyst. Data Analyst needs to have good exposure of commercial lending.
Should be proficient in Credit Risk, Market Risk and Operational Risk domains.
Strong expertise and awareness on the Credit Loss models, calculations, aggregations and reporting.
Should have performed intensive data analysis to address the key regulatory requirements.
Ability to comprehend regulatory business requirements and effectively translate them to Functional and Detailed Design documents.
Should have good exposure and hands-on experience working on Risk drivers namely: PD (Probability of Default), LGD (Loss Given Default), RR (Regulatory Risk Rating), EAD, RWA and EL.
Should have strong expertise working on Enterprise Data warehouse and business datamarts.
Should be very proficient on writing SQL skills and have strong capability to perform in-depth data analysis on Enterprise data warehouses and datamarts.
Should be well aware of GL (General Ledger) to Loan Account System reconciliation processes/techniques.
Should have the ability to work in a fast pace environment and be able to make real time / accurate decisions.
Should be proficient and detailed in documenting system processes, data flows, system interfaces and design documents.
Should have good hands-on experience in writing SQLs and should also have good exposure to ETL tools like Informatica to take up any analysis on data transformation rules.
Should be well versed with Bank’s change management policies as part of implementation activities.
High level of autonomy and independent judgment in making decisions and interacting effectively and positively with all levels of personnel, partners, and vendors as well as customers.
Excellent Excel, Word and Power-point skills.
Good verbal, written, presentation and interpersonal communication skills.
What we Offer
Your career matters to you and is important to us too. Because your goals and needs are constantly evolving, we offer visibility, leeway and support to help you grow and progress in your career. This approach builds notably on our comprehensive competency framework, our personal development, training and career management programs, and our University innovative and business-focused learning curriculums.
We promote a culture of diversity. We believe working with talented individuals from different backgrounds and points of view is a strategic advantage and an ongoing opportunity. Diversity enriches our creative solutions and adds value for our clients.
With the digital tech sector growing at a rapid pace and women significantly underrepresented in the industry, we are determined to inspire and recruit more women into technology and build diverse teams that reflect the clients we serve.
Our Shared values have been at the heart of the group since our formation. They are honesty, boldness, trust, freedom, team spirit, modesty and fun. These values influence the way we meet client needs while respecting the regulatory requirements of each country in which we operate, and the way we promote ethically sound practices within Capgemini and in our partnerships.
Capgemini is committed to building a workforce of employees with diverse backgrounds and work experiences. We strongly encourage women, veterans and active military service personnel to apply.
Disclaimer
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.
`This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law
Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.,About this Job
A leading FinTech company in New York City is looking to fill an immediate need by adding new Data Analyst to their growing staff. In this role, the analyst will be responsible for training our Artificial Intelligence engine by performing financial data analysis on dynamic, real-world events. This position is a unique opportunity to join a dynamic, high performance, results-oriented culture; the team includes proven leaders from the technology and financial industries. There is great potential for the right candidate to grow into a larger role internally.

About Amenity Analytics
The Amenity Edge: The Amenity Analytics Business Intelligence and Investment Platform creates and validates nuanced strategies by synthesizing data extracted via Amenity Analytics’ proprietary Text Mining Engine with fundamental, technical and event data, resulting in actionable and justified business decisions.

Skills Needed:
· Passion for solving problems with data
· High velocity of idea generation
· Minimal programming knowledge
· Works well with others

Qualifications
BS in Finance or related field
4 years minimum experience in finance, computer science or related sector
Minimum coding preferred but not necessary
Deep understanding of financial language required,What We're Looking For:

The Senior Analyst, Marketing Testing and Data Operations will manage the CRO implementation and tech product suite behind 2Us A/B testing and data operations. They will support existing technology integrations, tag management, reporting and data feeds and enable personalization and testing at scale. They will monitor existing testing and data collection products and will interface with marketing, data science and technology teams to initiate new product trials, as well as prioritize and develop requirements for enhancements to existing internal Marketing products. They will act as a thought leader within the team, and will seek ways to improve processes around testing and data operations overall.

Responsibilities Include But Are Not Limited To:

Implementation:
Execute web experimentation, GTM tag placements/best practices, and GA roll-ups/permission requests
Develop and champion new testing capabilities (query param triggered content, dynamic deadline content, personalization, exit intent)
Set up and configure necessary marketing tech infrastructure for new program launches
Create and maintain various reporting dashboards and data feeds
Interface with Data Science team to maintain and improve web marketing data tables
Product Management:
Manage operations, permissioning and usage of varying marketing technology products such as Google Analytics, GTM, Segment, and Optimizely
Prioritize and communicate critical bugs and issues to Manager for escalation to engineering team/vendors
Collaborate with marketing stakeholders to align on testing strategy and upcoming testing initiatives
Build and maintain documentation for marketing technology products
Planning and Communication:
Lead teamwide projects and initiatives
Mentor junior-level team members
Interview marketing stakeholders and solicit feedback to identify challenges to processes and products, and identify requirements for new products
Recommend process improvements around existing workflows
Work with various stakeholder groups to refine product and technical requirements to support overall marketing objectives
Research products and vendors, and conduct vendor assessments based on stakeholder requirements and business needs
Things That Should Be In Your Background:
Bachelor's degree, preferably in business, computer science, or a quantitative field
Minimum 2-4 years industry experience
Experience with Google Analytics and Google Tag Manager (certification preferred)
Experience with web analytics tools such as Segment (formerly Segment.io), Salesforce CRM, Omniture, WebTrends
Experience with A/B/multivariate testing tools such as Optimizely
Ability to understand and write SQL queries
Comfortable learning and discussing technical concepts
Ability to recognize data issues and investigate and propose solutions
Strong planning, communication and organizational skills
Experience working on cross functional teams with multiple stakeholders
Knowledge of HTML, CSS, Javascript and other programming languages preferred
About 2U Inc. (NASDAQ: TWOU)

At 2U, we power world-class online education and in-person boot camps. Going beyond traditional learning management systems, we use tech, people, and data to help top universities transform in the digital eraand eliminate the back row in higher ed. We support lifelong learning which means thinking beyond a single degree. It means finding ways for students to gain the skills they need to change careers, evolve their expertise, and meet the challenges of the changing world head-on. We help universities fill those needsdeveloping new digital education technologies and offerings capable of supporting students at different points in their lives. Whether they need a simple refresher, to learn something new, or to change their career trajectories completely, our university partners are there to help them succeed.Together with our partners, 2U has positively transformed the lives of more than 150,000 students and lifelong learners. 2U, Inc. has acquired and integrated two companies broadening our portfolio of education offerings into short courses with GetSmarter and boot camps with Trilogy. This role supports our 2U line of business.

2U Diversity and Inclusion Statement

At 2U, we are committed to creating and sustaining a culture that embodies diverse walks of life, ideas, genders, ages, races, cultures, sexual orientations, abilities and other unique qualities of our employees. We strive to offer a workplace where every employee feels empowered by the ways in which we are different, as well as the ways in which we are the same.

Benefits & Culture

Working at 2U means working with individuals that are passionate and mission driven. We collaborate on tough problems to deliver the best outcomes for our partners, students, and each other. You will find team members working together in our open office spaces, gathered in the kitchen grabbing a snack, or taking a break in our game rooms.

2U offers a comprehensive benefits package:
Medical, dental, and vision coverage
Life insurance, disability and 401(k)
Unlimited snacks and drinks
Tuition reimbursement program
Generous paid leave policies including unlimited PTO
Additional time off benefits include: volunteer days, parental leave, and a company-wide winter break from Christmas through New Years!
Note: The above statements are intended to describe the general nature and level of work performed by individuals assigned to this position, and are not intended to be construed as an exhaustive list of all responsibilities, duties and skills required. All employees may be required to perform duties outside of their normal responsibilities from time to time, as needed.

2U is an equal opportunity employer that does not discriminate against applicants or employees and ensures equal employment opportunity for all persons regardless of their race, creed, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, pregnancy, national origin, age, marital status, disability, citizenship, military or veterans' status, or any other classifications protected by applicable federal, state or local laws. 2U's equal opportunity policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including but not limited to recruiting, hiring, training, promotion, job benefits, pay and dismissal.,About Capgemini
Capgemini is a global leader in consulting, digital transformation, technology and engineering services. The Group is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50-year+ heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. Today, it is a multicultural company of 270,000 team members in almost 50 countries. With Altran, the Group reported 2019 combined revenues of €17billion.

Visit us at www.capgemini.com. People matter, results count.
Job Description
Title:- Data Analyst II

Location: Bridgewater NJ

Responsibilities:-
The responsibilities listed below are generic and may vary based on different levels of consultants requested
The responsibilities for requested role will be agreed upon with requested client manager
Directly interacts with more senior level internal and external stakeholders i e Managers Directors etc
Act as a subject matter expert in one or more designated data domains
Play a lead role in Data Governance Domain Workgroups as domain SME
Partners with BSG and business to define document data related requirements and settle deliverables and deadlines utilizing negotiation and creativity independently
Lead and provide direction to data analysts
Translate highly complex concepts and conclusions in a clear and concise manner in ways that can be understood by a variety of audiences
Lead and own the analysis of highly complex data sources identifying trends and patterns in data and make recommendations based on analysis results
Additional Responsibilities
Perform root cause analysis on complex data anomalies and working closely data stewards to define best practice
Facilitate review sessions with management business users and other team members
Direct and review the work of other Data Analysts
Coach and mentor junior analysts
Provide estimates for work efforts on projects
Oversees the creation of data assessments and project deliverables
Development of best practices guidelines and standards for Data Governance Data Quality and Data Integration
Qualifications
Must have skills:-
Hadoop and Python
Education and Experience Required:-
Bachelor s degree from an accredited college or university preferably in a Quantitative Field e g Actuarial Analytics Data Science Mathematics Engineering Public Health Data Science Information Systems Statistics etc
MS MA preferred
10 Years of relevant work experience
8 Years in Data Analysis or data related roles
6 Years of Healthcare experience
What we offer
Your career matters to you and is important to us too. Because your goals and needs are constantly evolving, we offer visibility, leeway and support to help you grow and progress in your career. This approach builds notably on our comprehensive competency framework, our personal development, training and career management programs, and our University innovative and business-focused learning curriculums.

We promote a culture of diversity. We believe working with talented individuals from different backgrounds and points of view is a strategic advantage and an ongoing opportunity. Diversity enriches our creative solutions and adds value for our clients.

With the digital tech sector growing at a rapid pace and women significantly underrepresented in the industry, we are determined to inspire and recruit more women into technology and build diverse teams that reflect the clients we serve.

Our Shared values have been at the heart of the group since our formation. They are honesty, boldness, trust, freedom, team spirit, modesty and fun. These values influence the way we meet client needs while respecting the regulatory requirements of each country in which we operate, and the way we promote ethically sound practices within Capgemini and in our partnerships.

Capgemini is committed to building a workforce of employees with diverse backgrounds and work experiences. We strongly encourage women, veterans and active military service personnel to apply.
Disclaimer
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.

This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.

Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law

Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.,About Capgemini
Capgemini is a global leader in consulting, digital transformation, technology and engineering services. The Group is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50-year+ heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. Today, it is a multicultural company of 270,000 team members in almost 50 countries. With Altran, the Group reported 2019 combined revenues of €17billion.

Visit us at www.capgemini.com. People matter, results count.
Job Responsibilities
Title: Technical Business/Data Analyst (Multiple openings)
Location: Tempe, AZ or Charlotte, NC or Chicago, IL or Whippany, NJ or Monterey Park/Sacramento, CA
Employment Terms: Fulltime with benefits

As a Technical Business/Data Analyst you will work with our product team to create analytical tools that will ultimately be a driver in driving the growth of the company. You will leverage data to drive operational efficiencies, provide key data driven insights, enable new opportunities and innovate on behalf of business customers.

You will drive future solutions that will impact how we capture new customers and delight our existing ones and you will have a lot of fun along the way

Responsibilities also include conducting full lifecycle analysis to include requirements, activities and design. Data analysts will develop analysis and reporting capabilities for our clients. They will also monitor performance and develop quality control plans to identify improvements.

Responsibilities

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data
• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
• Interpret data, study results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
• Identify, study, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
• Documenting all project related artifacts like Business Requirement Document, Business Use case document, System Use case document, Project Plan, Quality Assurance test plan, User testing plan, Demand request document, Change request document, End User training document, Business user training document
• Organizing daily standup calls with the developers, testers and leads to track status
• Generate actionable insights through the development of metrics dashboards and deep dive analyses
• Providing customer insights to Product Management as new initiatives are being identified, prioritized, implemented and deployed
• Serving as a business metrics guru and insight provider in the organization
• Acting as a key interface between business and technical divisions
• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science or a related field and or equivalent experience
• Up to 8 years of solid BA/DA experience with excellent business management and technology coordination skills
• Should have experience of the software development lifecycle
• Prior working experience as a Data Analyst or Business Data Analyst
• Technical expertise with data models, database design development and data mining techniques
• Experience with reporting packages such as Business Objects or equivalent, Relational databases (SQL etc)
• Familiarity or knowledge of programming such XML, JavaScript and ETL frameworks

Nice to Have

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets
• Strong analytic skills with the ability to collect, organize, evaluate, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
What we offer
Your career matters to you and is important to us too. Because your goals and needs are constantly evolving, we offer visibility, leeway and support to help you grow and progress in your career. This approach builds notably on our comprehensive competency framework, our personal development, training and career management programs, and our University innovative and business-focused learning curriculums.
We promote a culture of diversity. We believe working with talented individuals from different backgrounds and points of view is a strategic advantage and an ongoing opportunity. Diversity enriches our creative solutions and adds value for our clients.
With the digital tech sector growing at a rapid pace and women significantly underrepresented in the industry, we are determined to inspire and recruit more women into technology and build diverse teams that reflect the clients we serve.
Our Shared values have been at the heart of the group since our formation. They are honesty, boldness, trust, freedom, team spirit, modesty and fun. These values influence the way we meet client needs while respecting the regulatory requirements of each country in which we operate, and the way we promote ethically sound practices within Capgemini and in our partnerships.
Capgemini is committed to building a workforce of employees with diverse backgrounds and work experiences. We strongly encourage women, veterans and active military service personnel to apply.

Disclaimer
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.
This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law
Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.,Data Analyst,, Sales Operations - Oracle Data Cloud-20000A7B No Visa Sponsorship is available for this position. Applicants are required to read, write, and speak the following languages: English
Preferred Qualifications


As a member of Business Intelligence
team, you will be responsible for managing stakeholders, collecting
requirements, and performing analytics with a complex and granular financial
data set. Your primary focus will be working with business stakeholders to
understand their needs and deliver results that are timely, accurate and relevant.
In this position, you will play a key role in defining how ODC analyzes, talks
about, and views key business performance metrics. You will have the
opportunity to learn a exciting industry, work with new technologies, and grow
with the business.

You’ll need to combine
your ability in relationship building with analytical, data presentation, and
project management skills, whilst working with many functions across the Oracle
Data Cloud family, including sales, finance, marketing, and product teams, all
the way up to the executive team. You’ll need to know what data you have at
your fingertips and be able to think how you can use it to help the person in
front of you. Every day you will be playing a key role in helping Oracle Data
Cloud operate more efficiently and effectively.
Primary Responsibilities:

Front-line
Support: Be the first port of call for any queries that come into the
team. Answer the ones you can and help guide the ones you can’t to the right
people.

Requirements
Gathering: Find out today’s burning questions and work out how we can
answer them. Work out tomorrow’s questions before they’ve been asked and keep
us ahead of the game.

Report
Delivery: Make sure that the stakeholders that use our data get it when
they need it, in a form that makes sense to them. Be able to set expectations
around when they’ll receive it and respond to questions about it once they have
it.

Data
Curation: Who owns this account? Which product line is this SKU on? Which
team is that sales person on? You may not know, but you know who to ask, and
you know how to use the tools to record it.

End-User Training:
Ensure that our customers know what tools they have at their
disposal, and what they can do when they have them.

Ad Hoc
Analysis: Not every piece of work needs to be a multi-sprint project
involving a cast of thousands. Sometimes someone just needs an answer now to a
question that they’ll never need to ask again. Whether it’s done in Excel, SQL,
or the back of a napkin, just get it done.
Skills & Qualifications:

Experience: At least
4 years’ experience in a role that includes finance, sales or business analysis.
Must know your way round an Excel spreadsheet. SQL would be useful, and VBA a
bonus. Knowledge of data visualization tools like Tableau or Power BI wouldn’t
go amiss either.

Relationship
Builder: Everyone’s new best friend. Works well in team efforts,
building trust and respecting boundaries. Reads situational dynamics and
responds appropriately. Influences rather than directs.

Analytical: Good with numbers. Never
loses a decimal place. Knows how many zeroes there are in half a billion.
Calculates compound interest in their sleep.

Versatility: Are you
more of a data person, or a people person? The answer is “both” – you think
like a sales person, but you feel like an analyst, and then tomorrow you’ll
talk like tech and walk like marketing. Can crunch numbers and tell captivating
stories, all with one arm tied behind your back.

Honesty
& Integrity: Does not cut corners ethically; earns trust and does the right
thing. If people don’t trust us, they don’t trust our data, and if they don’t
trust our data then what have we got left?
Job Location

Broomfield, CO or New York, NY

Detailed Description and Job Requirements
Provides programs to improve operational efficiency, consistency, and compliance in support of the organization*s financial and tactical business objectives. Provides business practices and processes. Develops, communicates, and trains the organization on business practices and processes.

Serve as a liaison with other divisions such as Finance, Contracts, HR, Legal, Shared Services, Accounts Receivable, Purchasing, and Risk Management in an effort to ensure accurate and timely transaction processing. Collect, input, verify, correct, and analyze data to measure key performance indicator actual versus business objectives. Provide updates to management regarding budget to actual, informing them of deviations and opportunities. Provide management with economic impact and compliance issues surrounding key business decisions and/or deals. Communicate Oracle Business Practices to the organization and monitor process and approvals for full compliance. Drive implementation of new processes and procedures.

Duties and tasks are standard with some variation. Completes own role largely independently within defined policies and procedures. Attention to detail critical. Ability to collect, organize, and display data in spreadsheet format. Follow-through skills necessary to get information from internal and third parties and have data errors/omissions corrected. Relationship management skills strongly desired. Strong written and verbal communication skills to interact with management and possible clients desired. 2 plus years relevant work experience.

Oracle is an Affirmative Action-Equal Employment Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, protected veterans status, age, or any other characteristic protected by law.

Job
: Business Operations
Travel
: No
Location
: US-CO,Colorado-Broomfield
Other Locations
: US-NY,New York-New York
Job Type
: Regular Employee Hire
Organization
: Oracle,Big Data QA Analyst with Jupyter notebook-Healthcare domain Duration 6+ Months Contract Location NJ Rate Depends on Experience Must Have Health Insurance domain experience and well versed with Enrollment, claims, eligibility , AWS (Athena, Kinesis, MongoDB) AND Bigdata with Jupyter notebook Skills 7+ years of experience in QA Data Testing and handle large volume of Data Should have led Testing initiative, Write Test Strategy and Work independently without supervision. Hands on experience in Healthcare Domain Big Data , ETL testing, Data Mappings, Python and Strong SQL skills are a must. Must have worked on Cloud Computing web services , preferably AWS data analytics (EMR, Glue, Athena, Redshift, Kinesis, SQS, Dynamo DB or MongoDB) Experience working with open source web applications(eg Jupyter Notebook ) Responsibilities You will be working with project managers, business analysts and application developers, to quickly capture the major business functions and technology underpinnings to be able to design and implement tests of system functionality that exercise all critical inter-system integration points. Experience testing within multiple project management methodologies and utilization of SQL strongly preferred Experience managing multiple projects or demands with some development experience Experience testing software applications within the healthcare industry,ABOUT VTSVTS is the fastest-growing Proptech company in the history of commercial real estate (CRE). We have transformed a $15 trillion dollar industry with our award-winning platform which is used to manage over 60% of all office buildings. We're continuing to expand our product offerings and are building the industry's first and only online marketing software and end-to-end leasing marketplace, VTS Market. VTS Market will enable landlords to market their available spaces more effectively, and help tenant rep brokers and their tenants easily find and lease space online - a process that has traditionally been offline and difficult.It's an exciting time to join the VTS team - we recently reached unicorn status after raising $90 million in series D funding led by our clients (believed to be the largest venture financing in the history of commercial real estate software), we recently made the Forbes Cloud 100 list of the hottest private cloud companies, and were named one of Crain's best places to work!Our headquarters are in NYC, but we have hubs in other major US cities, Toronto, CA, and London, UK.Learn more at vts.com or follow us on Instagram (@WeAreVTS), Twitter (@WeAreVTS), or LinkedIn.What This Position Does to Help VTS Succeed:Solutions Consultants are key members of the Sales team, serving as product, technical and commercial real estate industry experts, aligning VTS solutions to prospects' pain points and demonstrating how to achieve meaningful business outcomes using those solutions. Through partnerships with Customer Success, Product Management, Marketing and Sales, the Solutions team serves as a critical voice of the customer and develops unique solutions that help VTS' customers transform their businesses. Solutions Analysts practice the art of the consultative sale, uncovering business needs and opportunities for process improvement and ROI, and validating the right solution for each customer through product demonstrations and proof of concept execution.The Senior Solutions Analyst - Data Specialist has a particular focus on VTS' data solutions and has three main priorities: 1) serve as an escalation point for the Solutions Consulting team on data-intensive opportunities, 2) helping our product team develop the best data products and solutions possible to serve the unique needs of VTS' clients, and 3) educate and arm the broader Solutions Consulting and Sales teams with the tools they need to understand and position those solutions to our prospects and customers.What Makes This Job Awesome:* Leveraging Business Acumen to Deeply Understand Customer Pain:* Rely on wealth of knowledge of how agency brokers use data to win, serve their clients' needs and maintain and develop new relationships* Ask the right questions to get at the heart of what customers need from data to make the right investment, leasing, and asset/portfolio management decisions* Demonstrate knowledge of processes, procedures, roles, responsibilities and relationships in typical commercial real estate transactions involving leasing teams and brokers* Need to be comfortable discussing the needs and challenges of the industry with C-level executives in high-pressure sales environments* Maintain credibility as an expert in commercial real estate and in using data and insights to inform critical decisions* Understand and articulate business pain, desired outcomes and capabilities across multiple stakeholder groups: practitioners, managers and C-Suite* Assist Solutions Consultants in the discovery process to ensure understanding of the real problems to be solved for our customers* Delivering Solutions Using a Consultative, Customer-Oriented Approach:* Assist Solutions Consultants in capturing the right outcomes, capabilities and metrics that VTS data products can add to a broader VTS solution in a way that aligns with customer pain and critical KPIs* Present VTS data products via sales pitches, product demonstrations and webinars in a way that tells a story about how VTS solves a customer's real business problems* Anticipate and overcome objections related to VTS and data products/solutions in order to increase win rate, decrease average deal time and increase deal size* Influence decision criteria of prospective customers in VTS' favor* Assist Solutions Consultants in and take ownership of data-related proof of concept (POC) events* Educating & Evangelizing:* Serve as internal subject matter expert on all things data* Teach broader Solutions and Sales teams about how data is used by landlords and agency brokers to gain competitive advantage to help them spot opportunities with which to align VTS solutions* Serve as voice of the customer to Product and Engineering teams to help them develop and refine VTS data products and solutions* Assist Product Marketing in developing messaging and sales collateral* Develop and train Solutions team on delivering effective data solution demonstrations, and manage related demo environmentsWhat Makes You Awesome For The Job:* Bachelor's degree* 4+ years of full-time work experience in a customer-facing role as an analyst, associate or otherwise at an agency brokerage* Experience incorporating industry and first-party data and insights into customer presentations, particularly in new business pitches* Excellent written and verbal communication skills, especially an ability to communicate technical/product value to a business audience* Understanding of financial terms and calculations that drive commercial real estate decisions, including key financial measures (NER, NPV, etc.)* Proven ability to deliver compelling and engaging presentations to key decision makers and executives* Ability to quickly adapt in client meetings to position products based on key value drivers* Strong problem-solving skills to identify, deliver and create best-fit solutions* An intrinsic curiosity and desire to learn more - growth mindset* Positive, team-first attitude* Ability to travel up to 50%, as required and allowable* Bonus Points if:* Experience with CRE data systems* Database/SQL experience* Understands the dynamics of the CRE industry including the implication of different company types (CPs, LPs, REITs, Fund Managers, Developers, etc.)VTS embraces diversity and equal opportunity in a serious way. We are committed to building a team that represents a variety of backgrounds, perspectives, and skills. The more inclusive we are, the better our work will be.All your information will be kept confidential according to EEO guidelines.,Principal Sales Operations Analyst - Oracle Data Cloud-20000FFZ No Visa Sponsorship is available for this position. Applicants are required to read, write, and speak the following languages: English
Preferred Qualifications
Principal Sales Operations Analyst

In this role you will oversee full
lifecycle of operations programs, including executive relationship management, solution
design and delivery of process and system automation that streamline
operations. You will work with senior leadership, subject matter experts, and
users to understand the needs of the business and drive the vision, strategy,
execution of defined business processes and technical projects that meet those
needs.
Responsibilities Include:
Identify
opportunities to increase revenue, decrease costs and drive productivity by improving
operational effectiveness across Oracle Data Cloud Sales, Contracts, Account
Management, Compliance, Engineering, Finance and Operations teams.
Achieve Go to
Market alignment on new sales and business processes and oversee signoff with
executive sponsors for workstreams you own.
Lead programs
end-to-end overseeing requirements gathering, research, process and system
architecture design, solution development, testing, documentation and change
management.
Develop, analyze
and validate project plans and supporting documentation including goals, use
cases, project success reports, project tasks, detailed functional and
technical design specifications, business rules, data migration plans, workflow
/ entity relationship diagrams and other project documentation.
Work with local ODC
and central Oracle technical teams to communicate new processes and shelf-ready
requirements for CRMs, CPQ, and bookings/fulfillment tools. Set priorities and
manage communication on timeline to stakeholders throughout the development
cycle.
Requirements Include:
4-8 years of
business analyst, product/project management or solution architecture
experience.
Ability to manage
needs and expectations of stakeholders and business leaders at varying levels,
including executive leadership.
Ability to
determine best approach to solve complex problems and solutions with simplicity
and scalability.
Strong experience
in consolidating feedback across functional teams and documenting detailed
requirements ready to hand off to technical resources.
Significant
experience with application of tools such as Oracle Sales Cloud CRM, Salesforce
CRM, JIRA, Conga, Dousign, Workato.
Ability to
determine best approach to solve complex problems and solutions with simplicity
and scalability.
Excellent
communication skills, analytical skills, and attention to detail.

Detailed Description and Job Requirements
Provides programs to improve operational efficiency, consistency, and compliance in support of the organization*s financial and tactical business objectives. Provides business practices and processes. Develops, communicates, and trains the organization on business practices and processes.

Serve as a liaison with other divisions such as Finance, Contracts, HR, Legal, Shared Services, Accounts Receivable, Purchasing, and Risk Management in an effort to ensure accurate and timely transaction processing. Collect, input, verify, correct, and analyze data to measure key performance indicator actual versus business objectives. Provide updates to management regarding budget to actual, informing them of deviations and opportunities. Provide management with economic impact and compliance issues surrounding key business decisions and/or deals. Communicate Oracle Business Practices to the organization and monitor process and approvals for full compliance. Drive implementation of new processes and procedures.

Leading contributor individually and as a team member, providing direction and mentoring to others. Work is non-routine and very complex, involving the application of advanced technical/business skills in area of specialization. Ability to collect, organize, and display data in spreadsheet format. Follow-through skills necessary to get information from internal and third parties and have data errors/omissions corrected. For this, relationship management skills strongly desired. Strong written and verbal communication skills. 8 plus years relevant work experience.

Oracle is an Affirmative Action-Equal Employment Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, protected veterans status, age, or any other characteristic protected by law.

Job
: Business Operations
Travel
: No
Location
: US-CO,Colorado-Broomfield
Other Locations
: US-NY,New York-New York
Job Type
: Regular Employee Hire
Organization
: Oracle,Job Description
Title: Data Analyst
Location: Charlotte, NC/Summit, NJ/Minneapolis, MN
Type: Full-time
Minimum of 8+ years strong NCR Teradata and SQL, UNIX, Data Warehouse Modeling, Teradata Utilities, Aggregates and building efficient views; SQL and UNIX experience
Certification in Teradata and Teradata SQL preferred Applicant must be able to successfully Use Teradata utilities fastload, multiload, tpump to load data.
Write, test and implement Teradata Fastload, Multiload and Bteq scripts, DML and DDL.
Very strong (hands-on) in programming and optimization techniques of Teradata
Logical & Physical Data Models
Experience with a number of data modelling techniques
Strong Data Architecture & Metadata experience
Clear understanding of Teradata architecture
Write views based on user and/or reporting requirements Gather system design requirements, design and write system specifications
Strong knowledge and hands-on experience of Unix shell scripting
About Capgemini
Capgemini is a global leader in consulting, digital transformation, technology and engineering services. The Group is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50-year+ heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. Today, it is a multicultural company of 270,000 team members in almost 50 countries. With Altran, the Group reported 2019 combined revenues of €17billion.
Visit us at www.capgemini.com. People matter, results count.
What we Offer
Your career matters to you and is important to us too. Because your goals and needs are constantly evolving, we offer visibility, leeway and support to help you grow and progress in your career. This approach builds notably on our comprehensive competency framework, our personal development, training and career management programs, and our University innovative and business-focused learning curriculums.
We promote a culture of diversity. We believe working with talented individuals from different backgrounds and points of view is a strategic advantage and an ongoing opportunity. Diversity enriches our creative solutions and adds value for our clients.
With the digital tech sector growing at a rapid pace and women significantly underrepresented in the industry, we are determined to inspire and recruit more women into technology and build diverse teams that reflect the clients we serve.
Our Shared values have been at the heart of the group since our formation. They are honesty, boldness, trust, freedom, team spirit, modesty and fun. These values influence the way we meet client needs while respecting the regulatory requirements of each country in which we operate, and the way we promote ethically sound practices within Capgemini and in our partnerships.
Capgemini is committed to building a workforce of employees with diverse backgrounds and work experiences. We strongly encourage women, veterans and active military service personnel to apply.
Disclaimer
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.
`This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law
Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.
`This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law
Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.,About Abnormal Security:
Abnormal Security is defining the next generation of email security defense. Our platform uses machine learning and artificial intelligence to baseline communication content, user identity, and behavioral signals in real-time and at-scale in order to detect the abnormalities of email attacks.

Customers love us because we consistently detect and stop what everyone else in the market can't -- advanced attacks that have never been seen before -- and we do so with beautiful user interfaces and best-in-industry customer support.

Our veteran team has built some of the most enduring machine learning platforms at leading companies including Google, Twitter, Pinterest, Amazon, Microsoft, and Expanse. We are located in San Francisco,CA, New York, NY and Lehi, UT.

Position Summary:


We are a fast-growing cybersecurity startup that is bringing Machine Learning at scale to fraud prevention. We are looking for a Junior Data Analyst to join our Security Analytics team. You will be responsible for analyzing potential email fraud and sharing your findings with the rest of the team.

What You'll Do:

Be part of the front lines of the cybersecurity defense - identifying, catching, and preventing email fraud.
Exercise incident handling processes across Windows & Mac platforms.
Perform basic email fraud analysis.
Stay ahead of the pack with the latest attack strategies and patterns in email fraud, and adapt our detection procedures and processes accordingly.
Communicate and coordinate additional fraud analysis investigations within the team.
Requirements:


Pride and ability to apply attention to detail and judgment in accurately identifying email fraud - even as attackers are actively attempting to hide their actions.
Capable of completing technical tasks without supervision.
Ability to foster a positive work environment and attitude.
Are comfortable in a fast-paced environment working with a small, close-knit team
Why Abnormal Security:


Competitive pay
Full medical, dental, and vision health insurance benefits
Daily catered lunches and snacks
Generous PTO
Strong growth opportunities and high ownership expectations
Team-wide commitment to excellence, velocity, and customer-focus
Everyone says they're hyper-growth, we're achieving it! Join a high-growth Silicon Valley startup, and experience what building a company, team, and product from the ground up looks like.
One of the most proven machine learning teams in Silicon Valley
Best-in-class customer traction and growth,Wellth is a fast-growing digital health startup with offices in Los Angeles and New York City. Our mission is to help people living with chronic conditions make healthier choices every day. Chronic disease is one of the largest challenges facing our nation. This challenge is largely created due to patient non-adherence to medications and care plans. Only about 50% of people with chronic conditions follow their care plan as prescribed. This creates enormous health and economic burdens on individuals, families, and communities that are largely preventable. Our platform deploys evidence-based interventions from behavioral economics through a mobile app to dramatically improve patient adherence, health outcomes, and costs of care. Wellth is at the forefront of designing powerful new tools rooted in behavioral science to deliver value to our customers: healthcare providers and insurers.

Behavioral Economics is at the heart of what we do. If you are a fan of books like Nudge, Freakonomics, and Predictably Irrational and were as excited as us that a Nobel Prize went to a professor of behavioral economics in 2017, then this is the place for you. Help us build and scale a platform that is helping hundreds of patients manage their care plan and improve their health. Visit us at www.wellthapp.com for more information.

We have created a smartphone app that uses the power of financial incentives to improve patient adherence. Our technology also provides valuable information to nurses and other healthcare professionals in the form of weekly adherence report cards and real-time alerts to help provide high-touch care to their patients. Patients check in every day by taking a photo of their medications in their hand.

Job Description

We are looking for a data geek that will turn our growing data into understandable information. This new role will provide data-driven insight across Wellth functions to help answer key questions, improving revenue, margins and users experiences and operational workflow. You will work with multiple systems and have exposure across the business. You speak SQL and love to go digging for answers and clues. Come help us grow Wellth leveraging the power of data!

Key Qualifications
2+ years using SQL and other data extraction methods to produce data that leads to answers, insight and supports decisions
A passion for providing data-driven insight that answers key questions, helping improve revenue, margins, users experiences and operational workflow
Extensive investigative skills - an ability to dive deep into the data and figure out whats really going on
Ability to walk someone through what data is being presented, where it comes from, and what it is telling us
Hands on experience creating polished, crisp reports or dashboards when appropriate for ongoing use
Get the right information to the right teams at the right time
Ability to work with multiple teams, set priorities, stay organized and work on multiple projects simultaneously
Regularly report key findings for strategic initiatives
Motivated by a fast-paced environment!
Key skills
Expert experience pulling large and complex data using SQL
Experience with different visualization approaches and when each are appropriate
Comfort with common statistical methods & analysis
Methodical, logical approach with excellent attention to detail
Experience with data visualization tools ( e.g. Periscope, Looker, Mode, Chartio, Tableau)
Strong proficiency in SQL (multiple years of experience)
Proficiency in statistical modeling working with Python/R
BONUS - Familiarity with AWS
BONUS - Familiarity with web analytics tools (e.g. Google Analytics) and/or product analytics (e.g. Mixpanel, Amplitude)
We are open to individuals interested in Part-time/Full Time opportunities,WHO WE ARE

Signal Sciences is the fastest growing web application security company in the world and has been named one of the Best Places To Work in Los Angeles by the Los Angeles Business Journal. With its award-winning next-gen WAF and RASP solution, Signal Sciences protects 40,000+ applications, APIs, and over 2 trillion production requests per month. Signal Sciences' patented architecture allows our customers to embrace cloud and DevOps while bringing actionable security visibility to development, DevOps, and security teams for the first time.

We work with some of the world's most recognizable companies, like Datadog, Under Armour, Duo, and Aflac across industries, including five of the top eCommerce companies, five of the largest software companies, and many of the top companies in financial services, retail, healthcare, media, and entertainment. Signal Sciences has won numerous technology and business awards including Technology of the Year from InfoWorld. Above all, we focus on collaborating as a team to deliver a product our customers truly enjoy working with.

SUMMARY

We are searching for an analyst who is passionate about translating data into impactful insights to drive business decisions. You will work with our Sr. Data Analyst and across all departments to support key business initiatives for the company. These initiatives will help scale the business and allow Signal Sciences to continue to grow. In addition, you will own several projects, as well as work collaboratively, to continually improve reporting and data quality.

RESPONSIBILITIES
Champion the data analytics process to help inform strategic and tactical business decisions across all teams
Monitor and measure performance of all lead generation channels, analyze the effectiveness of our marketing campaigns, and identify areas for optimization of lead conversion through every stage of the funnel
Design and analyze A/B and multivariate tests to drive KPI improvement
Communicate effectively with business stakeholders with varying technical and non-technical backgrounds
Support recurring and ad hoc requests from stakeholders by gathering, analyzing, interpreting data, and communicating the relevant results effectively
Use statistical and predictive modeling techniques to answer key business questions
Build out data documentation in Confluence
QUALITIES / EXPERIENCE WE'RE SEEKING
You enjoy using data to tell and communicate a story
Proficiency with SQL and Excel including advanced formulas/macros
Experience with Python, R, SPSS, and SAS
Exposure to BI tools such as Tableau, Looker a plus
Familiarity with Salesforce and other CRM tools
Experience with building dashboards
Empathetic collaborator who can communicate clearly across multiple cross-functional teams, including Sales, Marketing, Finance, Product, and Engineering
Process improvements and the development of tools to automate commonly requested analyses
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and distribute significant amounts of information with high-levels of accuracy
Understanding of a quantitative field, such as mathematics, statistics, engineering, computer science, business analytics, etc.
WHY YOU SHOULD JOIN SIGSCI

Named a Best Place to Work in 2019 by LA Business Journal and Comparably, SigSci is built on a cultural foundation of passionate, driven, and unique individuals. As a team member, you will enjoy 100% employer-sponsored medical, dental, and vision benefits, 401K retirement plan, and flexible work arrangements. Most of all, you will have the opportunity to make a positive impact with the industry leader in web application security.,Sr. Data Analyst Los Angeles

The Data Science and Analytics team at Tillster is looking for a highly motivated Senior Data Analyst with excellent facility in problem solving, data wrangling and analytical storytelling. You will be exploring data from multiple tools & sources to find actionable insights and prioritize, recommend & execute strategies to improve and optimize consumer experience and profitability for global restaurant brands. Your presence in the team will elevate Tillster's data accessibility and literacy, analytical efficiency, and the quality and profitability of our insights and data products.

General Profile

You dream in SQL. An experienced query writer and technical analyst, you can understand the business need and show flexibility in answering multiple types of questions with data (descriptive, diagnostic, and some predictive). You have a high degree of emotional intelligence, listening skills, and act like a product manager (putting yourself in the customer's shoes). You are comfortable pulling and massaging data from multiple sources, analyzing it with a variety of tools, and finding actionable insights from the data. You focus on discovering high-ROI sources of traffic, increasing conversion rates, improving average order value and finding loyal segments of customers to encourage repeat purchases. You form hypotheses to test based on data and work with cross-functional teams to execute and analyze experiment results. You effectively communicate analyses, visualizations & insights to broad audiences having varying degrees of data sophistication. You are a great presenter and have significant client interaction experience. You are organized, detailed, quick-thinking, and great at solving problems. You are both a great collaborator and also comfortable being independent. You live and breathe continuous improvement, self-motivation, and thrive in a fast-paced environment.

Key Responsibilities
Work with stakeholders across business functions including marketing, product, engineering, sales/account management, finance and operations to build analytics products that enable data-driven decision making
Guide analytics projects from discovery to solution and help Tillster raise the bar for how we should apply our data to business decisions
Explore data to find actionable insights through funnel analysis, user segmentation & cohort analysis (and other modelling approaches)
Develop and present analyses, actionable insights & recommendations to key stakeholders including senior executives & clients in forums and periodic business review meetings
Must Haves
4+ years of experience in site and app analysis providing customer behavior insights in a data-driven fast-growing mobile/web company. Experience in ecommerce analytics is required.
Proficiency in at least 2 flavors of SQL used with the following data sources: mysql, postgresql, sql-server, bigquery, or redshift
"Set Theory"-type thinking patterns when solving a technical problem (think Venn diagrams)
Expert SQL syntactic knowledge - window functions, correlated queries, system tables, performance tweaks, query plans, optimizations, etc
Ability to quickly translate business requirements, questions, investigations into a set of queries
Ability to search data and meta-data without mature documentation
Advanced Excel/Google Sheet/Tableau proficiency to present data as an intuitive story
Ability to make data interoperate between different environments/systems (ELT/ETL chops)
Mastery in complex CRUD operations for new requirements and also for debugging purposes
Bachelor's degree or higher in quantitative or related field.
Nice to Haves
Scripting and modeling using Python with Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Sklearn, R
Knowledge of statistics, probability, experimentation & underlying mathematical concepts
Digital marketing experience in SEO, SEM, social media, email, push notifications and common channels/tools to reach customers
Understanding of Data Mining & Machine Learning principles
Experience using Google Analytics, Google Tag Manager, Data Studio
Experience managing and executing AB & multivariate tests in optimizing customer experience and behavior using tools such as Optimize, Optimizely, Test & Target etc.
Experience with ML models such as product recommendations, churn prediction, classification/clustering, and propensity scoring
Experience playing the role of product and/or program manager
About Tillster

Tillster is the global leader in digital ordering and customer engagement solutions. For over a decade we've developed revolutionary self-service, ordering and payments solutions for mobile, tablet, online, kiosk, call center, and more creating personalized interactions based on consumer preferences, language, and currency. Our platform is compatible with 15+ unique POS systems, representing over 90% coverage in multi-unit restaurants. We offer one platform; one scalable, enterprise class solution to create world-class digital engagement solutions.

Tillster is proudly an Equal Opportunity Employer
Local Candidates Strongly Preferred
Relocation Assistance Considered
No visa sponsorship
Principals only no Agencies or calls please,Riskonnect, Inc. is the leading integrated risk management software solution provider that empowers organizations to anticipate, manage and respond in real-time to strategic and operational risks across the extended enterprise. Riskonnect is the only provider ranked in the leadership and visionary quadrants by world renowned industry analysts Gartner and Forrester. We employ more than 500 risk professionals in the Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific and serve over 900 customers across 6 continents. The combination of innovative risk technology, a customer success mindset, and employee-first belief makes Riskonnect a sought after place to work.

Primary Role Responsibilities:
Support, maintain, and streamline data interfaces.
Troubleshoot data interface issues. Analyze data (claims data, client databases) to find issues and anomalies and provide quality assurance.
Enable automation; add efficiencies to coding. Clean up data/codes.
Act as first level client contact for data-related issues.
Assist clients; interface with internal colleagues (e.g., Support) to resolve client issues.
Coordinate with colleagues globally to ensure seamless support.
Required Qualifications:
Minimum 1 year of experience working in a SQL Server Management Studio environment
Working knowledge of query-writing, stored procedures, and views
Strong analytical skills and ability for problem-solving
Detail-oriented, organized, and self-motivated
Within Role Promotion Considerations
Hiring of/promotion to Data Analyst, Senior Data Analyst, or Lead Data Analyst is based on a combination of:
Years of experience
Ability to meet or exceed key performance metrics
Superior display of relevant competencies
Knowledge of platform / technical expertise
Complexity of projects handled; ability to solve complex/escalated problems
Successful execution of project responsibilities from start to finish
Scope of work performed
Ability to lead/mentor less experienced analysts on larger projects
Key Performance Indicators
On-time delivery of data
Integrity of data
Turnaround of cases/issues
Successful automation
Timely communication
Number of accounts processed
Client satisfaction
Client relationship
Solid documentation
HelpfulQualifications:
ARMScertification
Microsoft SQLcertification(s)
Database tools (e.g., Oracle)
Experience with Salesforce
Experience with Financial data sets, involving financial validation.,As our Senior Data Analyst, on our data science team, you will get the opportunity to build statistical models, drive actionable insights, and tackle high-impact business problems. You will tell the story behind your insights - painting a picture to our cross-functional partners, explaining what the numbers are telling us, and recommending new ways our data can support multiple teams and our Company as a whole. A particular focus of your work will be on measuring methodologies to project and balance panel data to accurately represent purchase behavior.As a Senior Data Analyst, you are passionate about using data to drive insights and optimizations that create better connections for our customers and that improves Numerator's business results and success. You will not only have strong technical abilities to retrieve, manipulate, analyze, and visualize data but also excellent communication capabilities to stakeholders of all levels and skills. You will thrive in a highly autonomous and collaborative environment.If you are seeking an environment where you get to do meaningful work with a great data science team, then we want to hear from you!What you get to do* Define and regularly monitor KPIs, success metrics, and other analytics to maximize our control for all aspects of our data pipeline and performance.* Identify areas of analytic opportunity within Numerator and work with great focus to implement our vision.* Provide regular analysis and insights that influence our business strategy and operational plans* Partner with Product, Data, and Engineering teams to identify, investigate, and deliver solutions related to product and back-end data issues.* Support Senior Manager and broader team in developing business cases for growth opportunities across Numerator's business.* Analyze industry trends, competitive landscape, and internal performance, and report these findings to the leadership team.* Regularly communicate outcomes, new initiatives, and improvements to stakeholders.* Create and manage processes to deliver high-quality data through scorecards and data feeds.What You Bring* 3+ years of industry experience with granular data analysis, predictive analytics, or analytics technology products.* 1+ years of experience in a senior role or leading data analytic position where you had to execute the creation and proposal of technical/business solutions.* Hands-on experience reading/writing code as a Data Engineer, Technical Data Analyst or Data Scientist.* Fluency in SQL or other similar programming languages. Some development experience in at least one scripting language (Python, R, etc.).* Experience with data visualization and tools such as Looker, Mode, Periscope, Tableau, etc.* Experience launching internal metric dashboards and scorecards.* You are a data-storyteller who is comfortable communicating results in a crisp and effective manner to all audiences (technical and non-technical).* Strong analytical skills and can evangelize the use of data for sound decision making across functions.* Strong oral and written communication skills, and ability to collaborate with, and influence cross-functional partners.* Self-motivated, self-directed, and able to thrive in a fast-paced environment in an industry that constantly changes.* A mindset of designing for the future but building for now.* An eagerness to learn from others and help others grow with you.* A love of data and finding interesting questions to ask of it.Nice to Haves* Previous experience working with purchase panel data and/or survey responses.* Proficiency in at least one statistics/data analysis packages, such as Python or R.* Experience working with marketing insights, shopping data or in the retail industry.* Experience with understanding, analyzing and modeling user data and granular behavioral trends.* Exposure to machine learning frameworks and methods.What we offer* An inclusive and collaborative company culture- we work in an open environment while working together to get things done, and adapt to the changing needs as they come.* Market competitive total compensation package.* An opportunity to have an impact in a technologically data driven company.* Volunteer time off and charitable donation matching.* Strong support for career growth, including mentorship programs, leadership training, access to conferences and employee resource groups.* Great benefits package including health/vision/dental, unlimited PTO, flexible schedule, 401K matching, travel reimbursement and more.If this sounds like something you would like to be part of, we'd love for you to apply! Don't worry if you think that you don't meet all the qualifications here. The tools, technologies, and methodologies we use are constantly changing and we value talent and interest over specific experience.We are an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.,Overview

PDI is seeking a Data Operations Analyst to join our team working in an exciting, high volume retail data ecosystem with over $100B of transaction log data. Mastering the relationship between client data and our ecosystem will be an important element for this position. This position plays a critical role for both the retailer and their vendor partners to realize value from their data.

The Data Operations Analyst will help our team onboard new customers data, may gather technical requirements, utilize analytical approaches to troubleshoot data quality issues, as well as contribute to identifying, designing, and implementing internal data processing improvements. The successful applicant will be joining a team with a "Can Do" attitude, and a strong desire to make an impact on the business.

RESPONSIBILITIES
Assist in onboarding new customers data into the SwiftIQ data warehouse and platform, by collaborating with Data Engineering and Business Intelligence to deliver flawless onboarding
Scope data and integration requirements based on company knowledge and client-specific nuances, including new data-oriented features
Identify, design, and implement internal data processing improvements: automating manual processes, optimizing data delivery, re-designing data analysis infrastructure related to data quality and integration to deliver greater scalability, etc.
Play a key role in a client-facing position requiring collaboration with clients throughout the data procurement, onboarding, and troubleshooting
Audit data for quality and content ensuring full understanding of customers data
Investigate, troubleshoot any issue, and recommend solution as part of the onboarding and/or clients daily data feed
Develop an expertise on each clients individual data quality needs and document all things related to data quality
Use SQL to create complex queries not easily producible using the core platform
QUALIFICATIONS
Bachelor's degree in Finance, Information Technology, Statistics or related field required.
1-3 years of applicable experience
Outstanding analytical skills and a passion for problem solving
Advanced in SQL query writing, coupled with high proficiency in Excel
Phenomenal organizational skills and one who naturally thrives in a multi-tasking environment with the ability to effectively manage priorities with limited oversight
Strong team player with an opportunistic and self-starting mindset
Excellent oral and written communication skills
Desire to join an open and diverse team
Undergraduate degree; quantitative filed preferred
Strongly preferred:
Experience with customer relationship management is a plus
Knowledge and experience Python and/or R
Experience with analytics systems (data warehouses, dimensional models, etc.)
Basic working and practical knowledge of programming principles, techniques, standards and analytical ability
PDIs employee-oriented culture provides a supportive and dynamic work environment for high achievers. PDI seeks individuals who value continuous learning, hold high ethical standards, and are top performers in their respective fields. We offer competitive wages, professional development, superb culture, and a highly competitive benefits package. For more information about PDI, please visit our website at https://www.profdata.com. PDI is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We verify employment eligibility for all new hires using e-Verify.

Powered by JazzHR,Job Description
We are seeking a resource who loves data, analytics, and putting the two together to help drive accountability and innovation. We are a financial services firm based in the loop offering a great opportunity for growth, development, and the chance to work with the executive team to drive change.

PROJECT: Analytics for cost of business for IT services

WORK TO BE PERFORMED:
Gather functional and business requirements and rapidly translate information into a working set of operational and financial models, dashboards and management reports
Import, transform and rationalize data from systems of record into selected Technology Business Mgmt (TBM) tool
Operationalize data monthly by loading, validation and reviewing on a timely basis
Participates in collaborative efforts with domain leads, finance, and service lines to drive improved communication and shared direction.
Identifies cost / benefit of IT portfolio to properly identify gaps in bottom line
Perform other duties as assigned.
SKILL AND EXPERIENCE REQUIRED:
Previous work experience in a highly regulated, capital markets company preferred
Understanding of IT infrastructure domains
Knowledge of IT services and financial management process and best practices such as budgeting, cost allocations, capital and operating expense handling
Strong analytical, problem solving and troubleshooting skills with the ability to exercise mature judgment.
Demonstrated verbal/written communication skills to be able to articulate ideas clearly and concisely.
Ability to provide solutions that meet the business objectives and deliver on time, on budget, with a high degree of quality
Experience with TBM tools such as Apptio
Strong data transformation skills using MS Excel
Bachelor’s Degree in Information Systems, Business Management, Finance, or related field
MBA or related graduate level course work a plus
Minimum of 4 years of relevant work experience
Powered by JazzHR

vSZc0T9hpB,About WestRock
WestRock (NYSE: WRK) partners with our customers to provide differentiated paper and packaging solutions that help them win in the marketplace. WestRocks 50,000 team members support customers around the world from more than 320 operating and business locations spanning North America, South America, Europe, Asia and Australia. Learn more at www.westrock.com.

WestRock is currently seeking a Manufacturing Data Analyst.

Career Opportunity:Â Process production data; prepare data for output, track data to ensure compliance with usage and retention policies, and create/maintain/publish related reporting according to requirements.

How you will impact WestRock:
Processes/prepares data for production use, following standard data processing principles and complying with all internal programming/ documentation standards and internal security procedures.
Manages data from multiple sources including internal, external, and 3rd party data.
Manages Non-Conformance Report database, including NCR notification, investigation, and review.
Analyzes NCR data to identify any negative trends and develops countermeasures.
Manages all Rework activities, including Rework Estimate Requests and Rework Approval.
Ensures data integrity and program accuracy through quality assurance activities, troubleshooting, testing, and reporting of system maintenance, enhancements and new development.
Reviews data and articulates findings to sales, product management, and manufacturing.
Collaborates with other departments and functions to achieve creative and efficient solutions to client objectives.
Maintains accurate and up-to-date documentation of project details.
Works closely with Production, Quality and Technical managers to support operations and to ensure and document standard operating procedures that support data quality and production efficiency.
Conducts cross functional meetings to standardize quality processes.
Manages NCR data; facilitates improvement activities based on data.
Manages quality review board; facilitates meetings when necessary.
Maintains confidentiality of data and programs.
Performs other duties as assigned.
Â

What you need to succeed:
Must be proficient in the use of database tools and other data manipulation software (MS Excel, etc.).
Must have strong working knowledge of Windows OS and Microsoft Office.
Must be able to accurately manipulate large amounts of data, which may require lengthy periods of concentration, a high level of attention to detail, and superior organization and accuracy.
Must be able to manage shifting priorities on multiple projects while maintaining quality of work product.
Must be able to function effectively with a large degree of independence.
Must be able to write reports, business correspondence and technical documentation.
Must demonstrate excellent communication skills written and verbal and interpersonal skills.
Must be able to maintain good attendance.
Must be able to perform all essential functions of this job with or without reasonable accommodation.
Â

What we offer:

Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Corporate culture based on integrity, respect, accountability and excellence.

Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Comprehensive training with numerous learning and development opportunities.

Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â An attractive salary reflecting skills, competencies and potential.

Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â A career with a global packaging company where Sustainability, Safety and Inclusion are business drivers and foundational elements of the daily work.

#IL
Â
WestRock Company is an Equal Opportunity Employer committed to creating and maintaining a diverse workforce: Minorities/Females/ Disabled/Veterans.,About Capgemini

A global leader in
consulting, technology services and digital transformation, Capgemini is at the
forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities
in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong
50 year heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables
organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services
from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the
business value of technology comes from and through people. It is a
multicultural company of over 200,000 team members in more than 40 countries.
The Group reported 2018 global revenues of EUR 13.2 billion.

Capgemini
is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All
qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard
to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion,
disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any
other characteristic protected by law.

This is a
general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required
for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be
referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position
traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities
an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable
accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the
way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an
undue hardship.

Click the
following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant: http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law

Job Description:

Capgemini America, Inc. has multiple openings for the position of Lead Data Analyst based out of its Chicago, IL U.S. headquarters. The employee may also work at various unanticipated locations. S/he will perform the following duties: import/clean/transform/validate/model data with the purpose of understanding and drawing conclusions from data (through charts/graphs/tables); design/develop rational databases for collecting/storing data; build/design data input and data collection mechanisms; perform data related activities, including data extraction/profiling/cleansing/deduplication/standardization/conversion/transformational/loadin /data mining/warehousing/archiving/reporting; ensure optimum performance and data integrity of databases in production environments are in line with the requirements, responsible for server based databases in development and test environments, including database software installation, database creation, performance and capacity design, backup and recovery design and security

design; conduct research/data analysis/implementation for consulting projects; initiate and maintain client relationships; work on overall analysis and design to provide architecture for analytical and statistical reporting (using Oracle BI, Siebel, Informatica, Power BI and Tableau) for executive decision making; provide detailed analytical reports for subscriber mix, product mix, Trouble Call, Call In Rate and IMS migration progress; working with the other application teams in IT landscape to define and provide optimized solutions; plan/facilitate/build

Proof of concept and participate in end-to-end solution sessions to vet and finalize the solution; and execute project work plans in the field.

Basic Qualifications:

This position requires a bachelor’s degree or its foreign equivalent in Computer Science, Computer Applications, Information Technology, Information Systems, Data Science, Business Administration, Engineering (any) or closely related field plus at least 2 years of experience in the job offered, as Data Architect, Reporting Analyst, Data Modeler, or related IT position. In lieu of a bachelor’s degree, the employer deems that the suitable combination of education, training or experience acceptable is 3 years of study towards any US bachelor’s degree plus 3 years of IT experience. The applicant must also have; any period of experience conducting enterprise-wide data analysis, configuration, and report solutions; any period of experience designing, implementing, and supporting data for knowledge management solutions and related computer technologies, including SharePoint, for collaborative information sharing; any period of experience performing requirement analysis and documentation of open items; any period of experience working with end-users to determine and document and resolving the open-items that will drive solutions; and any period of experience working with computer technologies, including Siebel Analytics, SQL Server, Tableau, ETL, or Teradata.

Candidates who are interested in this position should apply by clicking the “APPLY NOW” button.,Job Description
Reporting to the Supervisor, provides reporting and analysis, manages data collections; works to understand and determine reporting needs of internal and external stakeholders through consultation and analysis, evaluates information obtained, performs problem‑solving and business modeling, and develops solutions; provides business and data analysis services; completes special assignments and activities as assigned.
Interprets data, analyzes results, and provides insights to determine operational impact and potential areas for performance improvement, and help inform decisions.
Develops metrics and designs reports visually displaying information and data, such as charts and graphs, to understand trends, outliers and patterns.
Integrates data from multiple sources to produce requested or required data elements and analyses
Ensures data integrity and quality of data reporting prior to distribution.
Manages data collection process by planning collections, updating collection planning documents, coordinating communication, and performing data quality reviews.
Collaborates with IT partners to understand IT systems as necessary to extract and analyze data and develop reports
Develops a deep understanding of the IT processes, departments, and data/reports, and works closely with leadership to understand reporting needs.
Maintains report forms and formats, information dashboards, data generators, canned reports and other end-user information portals or resources
Provides support and assists in training staff on the use of department data systems.
Identify and define data quality and reporting improvements
Makes recommendations to management on reporting needs and solutions.
Develops reports and deliverables for management and communicates with all levels of stakeholders
Provides ad-hoc data analysis and reporting support to IT
2-3 years’ experience in data visualization and reporting, both designing and developing reports
Knowledge of database structuring & report building
Knowledge of data mining and analysis using MS Access, MS Excel and/or Tableau.
MS Office (strong Excel and Access)
SQL
Tableau (or other data visualization tools)
Splunk experience a plus
Bachelor’s degree in Information Technology, Business Administration, Finance, or Risk Management. Post-graduate education may substitute for work experience.
General familiarity with a work environment that supports and encourages defined guidelines, policies, and procedures
Strong knowledge of Excel, Word, Tableau, Access, and basic database concepts
Strong understanding of SQL databases with the ability to query data from disparate data sources
Ability to analyze complex data made of unstructured, semi-structured and structured datasets to drive insights
Extensive experience with Data Visualization, preferably in Tableau
Ability to quickly learn new systems and applications
Exceptional analytical and problem solving capabilities
Excellent verbal and written communication skills. Ability to effectively communicate ideas and insights.
Demonstrated ability to develop robust and actionable reporting to help drive impact and outcomes
Ability to work independently, as well as in a collaborative and dynamic team environment
Must be able to multitask and shift priorities, as required, and work effectively under pressure
Must be a self-starter, with the ability to work in a fast paced environment, both independently and as part of a team
Powered by JazzHR

E5XPSNO4TX,SUMMARY

Reporting to the Chief Human Resources Officer, the Compensation and HR Data Analyst will be the driving force in establishing a global Compensation benchmarking system, and for developing/providing valuable People Analytics reports and insight to HR leadership and company management.

The primary components of the role are:
Research job requirements and evaluate job levels and compensation to ensure the company is competitive in the areas of total compensation. This role will be responsible for conducting compensation analysis both periodically and for ad hoc requests due to hiring/recruiting activity as well as promotions and internal comparisons.
Focus in the first 6 months is developing and building a company-wide (multi-country) job grading system with mapping to Radford survey data.
Compile analyze and distribute key People metrics which help optimize recruiting and HR efforts and drive improvements in the Employee Experience at Avetta.
Build new opportunities to maximize the value of People Analytics and reporting.
ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
Works with regional HR and management to establish standards for reviewing/gathering/documenting job information including required skills and behavioral competencies for each position in the organization; ensuring description accurately reflects the work being performed and the value created by incumbents.
Establish job equivalencies/grades.
Benchmarks jobs against Radford survey data and other market intelligence to determine competitive compensation ranges for each position.
Prepares and maintains job grades and compensation scales.
Collects and compiles People metrics and data from a variety of sources, including ADP Workforce Now, internal surveys, onboarding & exit interviews, employment records, government labor statistics, competitor's practices, and other sources.
Analyzes data and statistics for trends and patterns with attention to recruitment, hiring practices, motivation/engagement, and turnover.
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:
At least two years of experience in related areas such as job classification and compensation analysis.
Bachelor's degree in Human Resources, Business Administration, or related field required. (4+ years direct HR Data Analyst experience can be considered in lieu of degree)
Knowledge of quantitative and qualitative research methods.
Knowledge of human resource laws, regulations, and best practices.
Data Analysis.
Previous experience with ADP Workforce Now is beneficial, but not required.
Advanced/Expert level MS Excel; proficient in MS PowerPoint.
Capacity and capability to quickly learn the organization's HRIS, payroll, and similar employee management software.
Detail-oriented who can work autonomously exercising initiative and follow-through.
Able to exhibit a high level of confidentiality and personal integrity.
Powered by JazzHR,• 3 to 5 years of experience in the areas of Embedded Analytics (SAP Business Intelligence, data warehouse and analytical reporting) and at least 3 years in utilizing visualization tools in an SAP environment

• Must be able to perform as the functional and technical SAP Analytics SME

• Experience working closely with client technical heads, business heads, and business analysts to understand and document business and technical requirements and constraints

• Ability to work on multiple tasks/opportunities concurrently is required

• Experience with advanced analytics such as predictive, AI, and machine learning is preferred

Candidates should be flexible / willing to work across this delivery landscape which includes and not limited to Agile Applications Development, Support and Deployment.
Applicants for employment in the US must have valid work authorization that does not now and/or will not in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the US by Capgemini.

(Includes Data Modeler, Data Miner.) Responsible for importing, cleaning, transforming, validating and modeling data with the purpose of understanding and drawing conclusions from data (may be presented in charts, graphs, and/or tables). Also, design and develop relational databases for collecting and storing data and build and design data input and data collection mechanisms.

Required Skills and Experience:

You are responsible for data related activities such as data extraction, profiling, cleansing, de-duplication, standardization, conversion, transformation and loading, data mining, warehousing, archiving and reporting. Responsible for all activities required to ensure optimum performance and data integrity of databases in production environments, in line with the requirements. Responsible for server based databases in development and test environments including database software installation, database creation, performance and capacity design, backup and recovery design, security design.

• Qualifications: 3 – 7 (2 years min relevant experience in the role) years experience, Bachelor’s Degree.

• Should be proficient in Software Engineering Techniques, Software Engineering Architecture, Software Engineering Lifecycle and Data Management.

• Should have progressing skills in Business Analysis, Business Knowledge, Software Engineering Leadership, Architecture Knowledge and Technical Solution Design.
Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.
This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant - http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law

About Capgemini
A global leader in consulting, technology services and digital transformation, Capgemini is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50 year heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. It is a multicultural company of 200,000 team members in more than 40 countries. The Group reported 2018 global revenues of EUR 13.2 billion.
Visit us at www.capgemini.com. People matter, results count.,Servient is looking for an eDiscovery Analyst to join its growing team. The eDiscovery Analyst is responsible for ingesting ESI into the Servient application, performing exports and productions and assisting the Project Management team with the successful delivery of services to our clients.

Key Responsibilities:
Processes unstructured electronic data (emails, MS Office documents, etc.).
Performs metadata and text extraction, deduplication, deNISTing, etc.
Performs TIFF/PDF Conversion, Exception Handling and quality control.
Provides guidance to others on software issues, file formats, etc.
Investigates and troubleshoots software and process related issues.
Assists with providing clients with exports and productions.
Assists with application testing.
Skills and Experience Required:


Proficiency with data management services (e.g. loading data into database applications, conducting database search queries, developing reports for legal teams, and providing options with unique data).
Strong analytical and problem solving skills and demonstrate ability to work independently and in a team environment, follow detailed instructions, and meet established deadlines.
Strong communication skills (both verbal and written), service-oriented and a "can-do" attitude.
Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Information Management or similar.
About Servient:


We are a software product company that is built around Machine Learning and heavily focused on modern technologies namely Hadoop, HBase, Solr and Storm. We always stay on the cutting edge of technology using agile development methodologies. We are one of a handful of companies that have a modern technology stack functional in a production environment to solve complex web scale business problems.

Apply Now,Integrate is a rapidly growing, venture-backed enterprise SaaS business that helps B2B marketers grow revenue and reduce costs. We unify demand marketing channels into a single, powerful platform that help organizations achieve quantifiable business outcomes.

We have a top-tier client list that includes Dell, Cisco, Salesforce, VMWare, Rackspace, Microsoft and more. Our name defines our purpose. We believe in a better and more efficient world for B2B marketers.
Quick Hits:
- 9+ Years Old
- 275 Employees
- $80M in Funding

The Senior Data Analyst is essential to drive data integrity, accuracy, completeness, and value of our business information. The role will own the creation of data measures and there associated dimensional attributes that are distributed to stakeholders. In addition, this role will help to integrate/define enterprise data and distribute their definitions to ensure that stakeholders understand how to use the data for their specific purposes.
What You'll Do:
Develop strong partnerships with stakeholders to gather, understand and define data and reporting requirements, including development of multiple iterations to arrive at best solution to meet current/future needs
Collaborate with system and business owners to understand and define the underlying data and meaning to the associated business and system processes
Create SSAS in-memory databases in Visual Studio, along with the associated measures, definitions, relationships, and reprocessing routines
Be the custodian of enterprise data definitions. Document, distribute, and continually improve the overall use of data terminology
Manage enhancement/project list to establish a roadmap and meet critical deadlines essential to the business
Develop Power BI and Excel solutions that will provide answers to business leadership questions
Consistently researching and learning new abilities in the Power BI ecosystem to enhance current and future solution development
Improve database performance through review of tables, partitions, and its indexing to support standard data loads and queries
Create custom data integrations with various business SaaS purchases (like Workfront and Zuora) through Azure Data Factory where data can be pulled from SaaS APIs via Python, etc. and moved into SQL Server
What You Offer:
2+ years of experience working with Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services and Power BI
Understanding of how to use a Data Warehouse to obtain data for Power BI/Excel solutions through Analysis Services
Strong experience with Visual Studio to develop Analysis Services solutions and deployment of SSAS models into Azure
Data gathering, reporting, and analytical thinking skills
Ability to work independently or within a team environment
Drive and desire to learn and grow quickly with the pace of Microsoft product improvements
Strong interpersonal skills
Integrate In The News:
Integrate Named Top Tech Startup in Phoenix
Integrate Acquires Akkroo
Integrate Acquires ListenLoop
Why Four MarTech CEO's Bet Big on Integrate
Typical Office Environment: Requires extensive sitting with periodic standing and walking. May be required to lift up to 35 pounds unassisted. May be required to lift over 35 pounds using assistive device and/or team lift. Requires significant use of personal computer, phone and general office equipment. Needs adequate visual acuity, ability to grasp and handle objects. Needs ability to communicate effectively through reading, writing, and speaking in person or on telephone.,Edupoint Educational Systems, a Leader in K-12 Software Innovation and a "Top Companies to Work For" recipient is currently seeking a SQL Data Analyst to join our growing team of professionals in the Instructional Applications department. This position will focus on building advanced Analytics reports and dashboards to support our Analytics Product.

This opportunity is available in Mesa, AZ. If you enjoy working with a dynamic team and would enjoy working in the K-12 industry, we want to hear from you!

We offer a Comprehensive Package to include generous Paid Time Off, excellent medical, dental, and vision coverage, life insurance, short- and long-term disability, wellness programs, 401K with immediate vesting opportunities among other fun perks.

Job Summary:

The SQL Data Analyst with primarily focus on building advanced Analytics reports and dashboards to support our Analytics Product.

Job Duties:
Work in a project team consisting of subject matter experts, project managers, product leaders and clients to define and document business and technical requirements for district dashboards and data analysis needs with Analytics and MTSS/Early Warning System.
Using SQL, develop queries to analyze datasets, validate their quality and ensure queries perform under extreme data load.
Using creative skills and Edupoint standards, develop data visualizations using a multitude of chart options, groupings, drill-downs, pivots, aggregations, and more.
When appropriate, communicate with customers via phone calls, emails, and remote computer sessions.
Job Requirements-Knowledge/Skills/Abilities:
Advanced knowledge of Structured Query Language (SQL)
3+ years using SQL to aggregate, gather, and manipulate data.
Excellent analytical skills related to the development of report specification, data reporting, and data modeling
Transforms client requests into data deliverables to include data models, charts, drill-downs, and pivotable data.
Ability to gather and analyze data, reason logically, draw valid conclusions and make appropriate concise information and recommendations available in both oral and written forms
Some Experience with reports design tools like DevExpress, ActiveReports, or SSRS.
Analytical, result driven with high attention to detail.
Self-starter, quick learner, problem-solver and someone who enjoys challenges.
Accomplish targeted performance objectives with a positive and can-do attitude.
Must be a team player.
Education and/or Experience:
High School Diploma.
Bachelor's Degree in a technical or business discipline or equivalent technical expertise desirable.
Typical Physical Demands and Work Environment:

Work may require sitting for long periods of time; also stooping, bending and stretching for files and supplies, occasionally lifting files, objects or paper weighing up to 30 pounds. Requires manual dexterity sufficient to operate a keyboard, telephone, copier, and other office equipment as necessary. Hearing must be in the normal range for telephone and video conferencing contacts. Visual acuity necessary to work extended hours on computer screens. Ability to work in an environment with moderate noise and can be fast-paced and project intensive.

Company Disclaimer:

The statements herein are intended to describe the general nature and level of work being performed by employees and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list of responsibilities, duties, and skills required of personnel so classified. Furthermore, they do not establish a contract for employment and are subject to change at the discretion of the employer.

Edupoint Educational Systems is an Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or protected veteran status.,About Us

Access is an IIoT (Industrial Internet of Things) company providing solutions to supply chain, aviation and construction sectors. We help our customers improve safety, compliance, productivity and hence their bottom line.

Position Overview

You will take responsibility for managing our master data set, developing reports, and troubleshooting data issues. To do well in this role you need to be detail oriented, have experience or an educational background in data analysis, and familiarity with data analysis tools and databases.

Position Responsibilities
Collaborate with and offer insights into different internal teams.
Provide teams and individual stakeholders with actionable insights based on data to support decision making efforts.
Extract raw data from numerous data sources and aggregate it into cohesive data sets to ensure data is accurate and stable.
Build and analyze automated data set dashboards to predict issues before they arise, identify bugs in data and resolve them.
Design analytics dashboards and KPI reports for internal teams to identify critical data points and translate data into clear and coherent visualizations and reports for non-technical teams.
Support individual team members by creating customizable tabular or visual reports with ad hoc reporting.
Communicate and present on technical information in non-technical terms.
Training end users on new reports and dashboards.
Position Requirements
Students majoring in statistics, math, computer science, physics, finance, business administration, economics or a related field.
Experience working in technical data analysis, data science, data warehousing, financial services or related.
Experience with designing reports and dashboards.
Experience with databases.
Strong knowledge of coding languages.
Knowledge of methodologies and processes for managing large scale databases.
Excellent communication skills including written, verbal and presentation.
Job Types: Full-time, Internship

Pay: $15.00 - $17.00 per hour

Schedule:

Monday to Friday
COVID-19 considerations:
To keep our employees safe we have regular disinfection of the office premises and everyone around wears a mask.

Education:
Bachelor's (Preferred)
Company's website:
theaccessway.com
Company's Facebook page:
https://www.facebook.com/Access-Control-Group-Access-100773445034653/
Work Remotely:
No,Job Description
Role Overview

Security, energy management, asset protection, and automation efficiencies...these are a few of our favorite things.

STRATIS IoT is actively seeking an experienced and passionate Data Analyst to join its engineering teams who are creating & molding the next generation of smart building technology. Our diverse family is made-up of adventurous, multifaceted individuals who bring what they've learned through various walks of life to improve our products.

As a Data Analyst, you should have at least two years of experience in the field, addressing real-world challenges. You will utilize your experience to assist in gaining user experience insights, product successes, key data opportunities, and overall scaling of the STRATIS platform.

Key Responsibilities
Love what you do & be an integral part of our family that is forging a new path in IoT technology;
Work with internal and external stakeholders to understand how they are using our product's data, align on useful metrics, and produce data representations an interpretable way;
Use creative analysis to surface opportunities across multiple databases;
Work relentlessly to ensure data findings are accessible to users at all levels through dashboards, visualizations, and reports;
Drive sales awareness, marketing efforts, program highlights when key data-points are discovered;
Actively interact with clients & partners during pilot projects to gain user insights;
Utilize data to understand user experiences in the field, as they are controlling & managing devices such as locks, thermostats, lights, shades, water metering, energy metering, & leak detection;
Innovate constantly on existing and cutting-edge technology to build new solutions;
Assist in the company's machine learning and AI goals in order to fully capitalize on our automation capabilities;
Take ownership of the company's data reporting capabilities, but work collaboratively with engineering teams to ensure you are armed with what you need;
Represent the company well as a continually client-facing team member;
This role reports directly to the Chief Innovation & Product Officer (CIPO).
Qualifications
2+ years of experience working with software engineering teams in an Agile environment as a data-oriented team-member;
Extraordinary initiative, drive, organization, and task-management skills;
Familiarity with Looker (LookML);
Ability to positively influence decision-making at all levels within an engineering organization with data insights;
Quick to learn new, complex systems and technologies;
Understanding of engineering principles, scrum practices, etc;
Excited to impact real people every day through your work.
Interview Process

PHASE 1: A member of our team will contact you to arrange a call to discuss your professional accomplishments & ambitions. You may be asked to participate in a second phone call to gauge technical capabilities as well.

PHASE 2: You will be invited to interview with the teams. This interview will include a review by multiple members of our various teams. Throughout this phase of the interview process, you will get the chance to interact with our teams in a casual, free-flowing environment.

PHASE 3: Final interview to assess our mutual culture-add, your relevant skillsets, and to answer any additional questions that may have come up throughout the process. Prior to this phase, you may be requested to contribute to a challenge of some type.

About STRATIS

Located in the former East Falls community theatre in the East Falls neighborhood of Philadelphia, STRATIS is widely considered one of the best-kept secrets in emerging technology. Since 2014, we have been the leader in smart apartments for multifamily.

We were named one of Entrepreneur Magazine's "Best Companies in America" two years in a row, #740 on Inc. Magazine's list of 5000 "fastest-growing companies" in 2019, and our CEO, Felicite Moorman, was Ernst & Young's 2017 local and regional Entrepreneur of the Year.

As the only system of its kind built for the complexities of multifamily building management, we are leading the global movement for smart cities in the urban and residential sectors. To date, STRATIS has been installed in over 30,000 units in Japan and Europe, and in over 350,000 units across 46 states in the U.S.

Key Benefits
Competitive salary
401K retirement plan (matching)
Medical, dental, and vision plan
Life Insurance plan
SEPTA Transportation discounts
Dog-friendly office for people-friendly dogs
Ability to see your contributions impact lives every day
Flexible schedules and vacation/work from home policy (including maternity/paternity leave)
Sponsorship for conferences and educational events
Supportive, casual, and professional work environment for a team that focuses on creating linchpins, mentors, and experts in their field.,Piper Companies is looking for an SQL Data Analyst for a financial services firm in the Horsham, PA area. Responsibilities for the SQL Data Analyst Analyze existing application databases to develop source to target mapping for the design of a new enterprise data warehouse Communicate with business stakeholders to understand data usage across verticals Qualifications for the SQL Data Analyst 5+ years of data analysis experience Expert in SQL querying Proficient in integrating and transforming business logic into new data models Expert at source to target mapping Understand data warehousing concepts - fact tables, dimensions, start schema Excellent communication skills - provides clear, concise answers to business stakeholders Knowledge of Microstrategy - a plus CompensationBenefits for the SQL Data Analyst 55-65hr W2 (12+ month contract), Potential for full-time conversion Comprehensive benefit package Medical, Dental, Vision, 401k, and Paid Time Off Keywords sql analyst, sql server developer, etl developer, database developer, senior etl developer, senior sql developer, senior sql engineer, senior database engineer, sql, sql server, ssis, ssrs, ssas, cube, etl, database design, data warehouse, unit testing, Teradata, business objects, informatica, data modeling, star schema, snowflake schema, t-sql, git, svn, devops, benefits, vacation, holiday, 401k,Data Analyst - Horsham, PA 19044 My client, a loan origination company in Horsham, PA is in need of a Data Analyst for a 9 month + contract to potential hire opportunity to help build out a new Data Warehouse. Responsibilities include bull Writing source to target mapping documentations bull Performing SQL queries Qualifications include bull 5 + years of data analytics experience bull Extensive SQL querying experience bull Expert level Microsoft Excel experience bull Understanding of Data Warehouse concepts Dimensions Fact Tables Star Schema bull Strong analytical mind within data bull Detail oriented (this is vital work for the Data Engineering team) bull Strong communications skills in order partner with the business side bull Be able to pick apart the current Data Warehouse Compensation Expectations bull 50 - 60Hour W2 bull Full Benefits Healthcare, Dental, Vision,Piper Companies is looking for a Technical Business Analyst for an leading financial solutions client located in Horsham, PA. Responsibilities for the Technical Business Analyst Gather and translate business requirements into functional specs - focused on data reporting efforts Act as the liaison between the business and IT teams Qualifications for the Business Analyst 5+ years as a Business Analyst focused on data-centric projects Experience creating technical requirement documents through translation of business requirements Comfortable with data warehouse concepts - fact tables, dimensions, star schemas, etc Experience working on data reporting projects - SSRS, PowerBI, Crystal Reports, Cognos, Business Objects Capable of running complex SQL queries Microstrategy experience - a plus Comfortable using the Atlassian suite (Jira, Tempo, Confluence) CompensationBenefits for the Technical Business Analyst 55-65hr (12 month+), Full-time conversion possible Comprehensive benefit package Medical, Dental, Vision, 401k, and Paid Time Off Keywords Technical business analyst, business analyst, business systems analyst, product owner, requirements gathering, functional specs, class model, constraint, deliverable, enterprise analysis, feature, functional design, functional requirements, finance, data, statistics, data modeling, data warehouse, etl, sql, data architecture, needs, jad, product, requirements analysis, user stories, olution assessment, servicenow, itsm, it service management, shared services, traceability, use case diagram, stakeholder, benefits, vacation, holiday, 401k,The Data Analyst is responsible for data entry and maintenance for our integrated enterprise system (SAP). As part of the Data Integrity team, this position is responsible for the accurate entry of data into SAP. The Data Integrity team is responsible for the efficient and effective management of part master data. This will require an individual with exceptional attention to detail, intermediate to advanced computer skills, in-depth knowledge of our business, products and processes.

WORK PERFORMED

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required.

Essential Functions of the Job:

Product Data – Responsible for managing product information levels to established standards
Maintain data to meet company standards
Data includes images, technical specifications and other data elements
Ensure automated data feeds successfully populate materials
Manually populate non-automated data as necessary via proprietary system
Identify system enhancements to improve automated processes and quality of information
Perform audits to ensure accuracy of assigned manufacturers or categories
Communicate with providers and manufacturers to ensure complete product data is supplied
Request necessary information
Identify areas of improvement and provide feedback
Review data standards for assigned manufacturers and/or categories
Implement data standard improvements through manual and automated means to meet needs
Provide customer service support for both external and internal customers
Support and validate teammate adherence to master data policies.
Material Maintenance – Responsible for maintaining product catalog to established standards; Performing Price File Maintenance
Review automated data feeds for successful materials creation
Ensure materials are created correctly via download process
Identify and communicate reasons for automated failures to improve process
Manually process download failures
Determine if Sales requests meet Insight Catalog Policy
Review opportunities and determine if it is appropriate business for Insight
Provide guidance to address future opportunities
Ensure materials are not added to the catalog that do not fit Insight strategy
Manually create non-automated materials proactively or reactively according to company policy
Create materials via proprietary systems and/or SAP
Determine appropriate source, costing and categorization
Process internal requests for creation
Discontinue materials that are no longer available and/or based on company policy
Other projects – Responsible for completing additional projects and assignments as required by the department
All other assigned duties
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

Education and/or Experience:

Associates degree or above from a college or university; or 3 years industry work experience.

KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES

Following are the skills, knowledge and abilities necessary to perform this job
Advanced spreadsheet skills
Ability to analyze and troubleshoot information for resolution
Ability to work well in cross-functional teams
Ability to multi-task in a fast-paced environment
Ability to meet aggressive service-level agreements
Ability to take a complex process or technology and create easy-to-follow copy
Excellent written and verbal communication, with strong editing skills
Knowledge of AP style
Vast knowledge of technical writing and styles associated with it
Collaborating with marketing and IT on search engine relevancy as it relates to parts data’s influence
Proficiency with MS Word, Excel, Outlook and SAP.
Ability to write reports and/or business correspondence.
Ability to effectively present information and respond to questions from groups of managers, customers, other employees.
Ability to effectively present information to other departments and manufacturer representatives.
Ability to read, analyze, and interpret business documents.
Ability to effectively communicate via email, phone and in person.
Ability to understand processes and identify areas of improvement.
Ability to multi-task and demonstrate strong organizational details.,The Data Analyst II is responsible for data entry and maintenance for our integrated enterprise system (SAP). As part of the Data Integrity team, this position is responsible for the accurate entry of data into SAP. The Data Integrity team is responsible for the efficient and effective management of part master data. This will require an individual with exceptional attention to detail, intermediate to advanced computer skills, in-depth knowledge of our business, products and processes.

WORK PERFORMED

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required.

Essential Functions of the Job:

Product Data – Responsible for managing product information levels to established standards
Maintain data to meet company standards
Data includes images, technical specifications and other data elements
Ensure automated data feeds successfully populate materials
Manually populate non-automated data as necessary via proprietary system
Identify system enhancements to improve automated processes and quality of information
Perform audits to ensure accuracy of assigned manufacturers or categories
Communicate with providers and manufacturers to ensure complete product data is supplied
Request necessary information
Identify areas of improvement and provide feedback
Review data standards for assigned manufacturers and/or categories
Implement data standard improvements through manual and automated means to meet needs
Provide customer service support for both external and internal customers
Support and validate teammate adherence to master data policies.
Material Maintenance – Responsible for maintaining product catalog to established standards; Performing Price File Maintenance
Review automated data feeds for successful materials creation
Ensure materials are created correctly via download process
Identify and communicate reasons for automated failures to improve process
Manually process download failures
Determine if Sales requests meet Insight Catalog Policy
Review opportunities and determine if it is appropriate business for Insight
Provide guidance to address future opportunities
Ensure materials are not added to the catalog that do not fit Insight strategy
Manually create non-automated materials proactively or reactively according to company policy
Create materials via proprietary systems and/or SAP
Determine appropriate source, costing and categorization
Process internal requests for creation
Discontinue materials that are no longer available and/or based on company policy
Other projects – Responsible for completing additional projects and assignments as required by the department
All other assigned duties
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

Education and/or Experience:

Associates degree or above from a college or university; or 3 years industry work experience.

KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES

Following are the skills, knowledge and abilities necessary to perform this job
Advanced spreadsheet skills
Ability to analyze and troubleshoot information for resolution
Ability to work well in cross-functional teams
Ability to multi-task in a fast-paced environment
Ability to meet aggressive service-level agreements
Ability to take a complex process or technology and create easy-to-follow copy
Excellent written and verbal communication, with strong editing skills
Knowledge of AP style
Vast knowledge of technical writing and styles associated with it
Collaborating with marketing and IT on search engine relevancy as it relates to parts data’s influence
Proficiency with MS Word, Excel, Outlook and SAP.
Ability to write reports and/or business correspondence.
Ability to effectively present information and respond to questions from groups of managers, customers, other employees.
Ability to effectively present information to other departments and manufacturer representatives.
Ability to read, analyze, and interpret business documents.
Ability to effectively communicate via email, phone and in person.
Ability to understand processes and identify areas of improvement.
Ability to multi-task and demonstrate strong organizational details.,Healthcare is about decision-making - and the best decisions are those made with complete and comprehensive data. At Pieces, we collect and deliver data from every part of the patient care journey to help healthcare providers and social service organizations keep communities flourishing.Pieces uses the most cutting-edge technology to help vulnerable populations get the care they need. We use artificial intelligence, natural language processing (NLP), and machine learning to address clinical and social determinants of health. Our tools provide the insights needed to improve patient care beyond the hospital walls.In plain terms, we're building technology platforms to make better patient care easy. And we need a smart Data Analyst to help us achieve our mission.The Data Analyst Intern is responsible for supporting advanced analytics and business intelligence on health artificial intelligence (AI) products to enable knowledge discovery in health care organizations. Our goal is to use these findings to improve patient care quality, outcomes, and clinical decision making. This role directly supports internal business partners by providing practical analytics solutions for emerging product development, delivery, and client engagement requests.Duties, responsibilities and activities may change or new ones may be assigned at any time with or without notice. Specific responsibilities include but not limited to:Responsibilities:* Derive business insights from data, answer clinical questions using data science techniques, respond to on-demand requests for general business reports, support data analysis for new product design and development.* Implement basic business intelligence techniques to answer business questions, such as performance analysis on models and products.* Utilize the data engineering pipelines and other features/tools in data science infrastructure to support end-to-end analytics solutions.* Participate in project preparation, exploring the scope, depth, and challenges of new projects, and formulating strategies and action plans.* Responsible for data scoping, exploration, identification, extraction, cleaning, applying logic, verifying data elements and constructing the database that is relevant to individual projects, and other data analysis processes.* Support efforts in dissecting, designing, analyzing, developing, summarizing, and presenting predictive modeling, machine learning, and other advanced analytics solutions to key stakeholders.* Take initiatives to conduct in-depth assessment and selection of the most appropriate methodologies for the project given its complexity, scope, and data structure for overall descriptive statistics, exploratory data analysis, including graphs, schematic summaries, and necessary transformations and confirmatory data analysis, including statistical tests and/or modeling.* Responsible for tracking project-specific issues from initiation through release. Independently identifies & troubleshoots problems encountered during the process. Responsible for preparation of data files and statistical reports for project release. Identifies systematic problems with data and software.* Stays abreast of the latest developments, advancements, and trends in the field of data science by attending seminars/workshops, reading professional journals, and actively participating in professional organizations. Integrates knowledge gained into current work practices.* Maintains knowledge of applicable rules, regulations, policies, laws and guidelines that impact the assigned department. Develops effective internal controls designed to promote adherence with applicable laws, accreditation agency requirements, and federal, state, and private health plans. Seeks advice and guidance as needed to ensure proper understanding.Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.Required Skills* Hands-on experience with database and data pipeline development.* Research and development experience in predictive modeling, data mining, or other advanced analytics is a plus.* Experience with Docker and Kubernetes is a plus* Experience with Natural Language Processing is a plus.* Team-based work and communication tools (Google Doc, Sheet, Atlassian, etc).* Ability to self-manage, work independently and meet deadlines.* Critical thinking skills.Required ExperienceEducation:* Master's or higher degree in computer science, data science, statistics, applied math, informatics, business analytics, or a related field.* Two years of experience in analysis of healthcare or business related data and information system.Experience:* Hands-on experience with database and data pipeline development.* Research and development experience in predictive modeling, data mining, or other advanced analytics is a plus.* Proficient with programming languages including Python and SQL in performing data query, cleaning, manipulation, processing management and analysis is required.* Knowledge of informatics, and statistical methods, concepts, practices, procedures and their applications.* Proficient with Linux and MacOS operating systems.Benefit* Paid internship* The chance to be part of a rapidly growing startup* Solid experience in developing health NLP systems on real-life applications* A comprehensive tech setup* Healthy snacks* Free arcade games (de-stress while trying to knock off the reigning Pac-Man office champion!)* The team at Pieces is a driven bunch of individuals working toward a common goal. When you join our team, you'll find a mission-driven culture built on:* Positivity: we work hard, and we are enthusiastic about problem-solving and empathetic to our partners' causes.* Teamwork: we believe in harnessing the strength of the collective, mentorship, and amplifying each other's strengths.* Great communication: clear, concise, empathetic communication is paramount to our success.Job Location Dallas, Texas, United States Position Type TemporaryApply,About Capgemini

With more than 190,000 people, Capgemini is present in over 40 countries and celebrates its 50th Anniversary year in 2017. A global leader in consulting, technology and outsourcing services, the Group reported 2016 global revenues of EUR 12.5 billion (about $13.8 billion USD at 2016 average rate). Together with its clients, Capgemini creates and delivers business, technology and digital solutions that fit their needs, enabling them to achieve innovation and competitiveness. A deeply multicultural organization, Capgemini has developed its own way of working, the Collaborative Business ExperienceTM, and draws on Rightshore�, its worldwide delivery model.

Learn more about us at www.capgemini.com.

Capgemini is an Equal Opportunity Employer encouraging diversity in the workplace. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, gender identity/expression, age, religion, disability, sexual orientation, genetics, veteran status, marital status or any other characteristic protected by law.

This is a general description of the Duties, Responsibilities and Qualifications required for this position. Physical, mental, sensory or environmental demands may be referenced in an attempt to communicate the manner in which this position traditionally is performed. Whenever necessary to provide individuals with disabilities an equal employment opportunity, Capgemini will consider reasonable accommodations that might involve varying job requirements and/or changing the way this job is performed, provided that such accommodations do not pose an undue hardship.

Responsibilities:

As part of the Capgemini Technology Services Group, this person will be responsible for the full systems lifecycle from requirements gathering through implementation of data analysis solutions. This person will work closely with our clients and must demonstrate professional knowledge to ensure that the work products and deliverables are of the highest caliber to ensure client satisfaction. This person will also apply subject matter expertise to identify, develop, and implement techniques to improve engagement productivity, increase efficiencies, mitigate risks, resolve issues, and optimize cost savings and efficiencies for each client.
Click the following link for more information on your rights as an Applicant : http://www.capgemini.com/resources/equal-employment-opportunity-is-the-law

(Includes Data Modeler, Data Miner.) Responsible for importing, cleaning, transforming, validating and modeling data with the purpose of understanding and drawing conclusions from data (may be presented in charts, graphs, and/or tables). Also, design and develop relational databases for collecting and storing data and build and design data input and data collection mechanisms.

Required Skills and Experience:

You are responsible for data related activities such as data extraction, profiling, cleansing, de-duplication, standardization, conversion, transformation and loading, data mining, warehousing, archiving and reporting. Responsible for all activities required to ensure optimum performance and data integrity of databases in production environments, in line with the requirements. Responsible for providing support of server based databases in development and test environments including database software installation, database creation, performance and capacity design, backup and recovery design, security design, providing Analytical feedback as appropriate.

• Qualifications: 1-4 years experience, Bachelor’s Degree.
• Should have progressing skills in Software Engineering Techniques, Software Engineering Architecture, Software Engineering Lifecycle and Data Management.
• Should have baseline skills in Business Analysis, Business Knowledge, Software Engineering Leadership, Architecture Knowledge and Technical Solution Design.,Description:
PROLIM Global Corporation (www.prolim.com) is currently seeking SAS DATA ANALYST for location DALLAS, TX with one of our top Clients.

Job Description

There is a need for a data analyst who has the
capability of pulling data from source systems, analyzing this information to
provide risk based decision making conclusions to executive leadership teams.
Strengths in SAS, SQL & Tableau are preferred. This analyst will also be
responsible for assisting in the development and presentation of Ad-Hoc data
requests for our data research team when time permits.

Key Job Functions
Process and Data Requirements Analysis and Testing

Communicate business data and reporting requirements as an integral part of all
projects

Plan and execute reporting quality assurance testing for applicable reporting
requirements within all projects

Data Extraction and Analysis

Utilize available applications/tools to query data and extract data as needed
for reporting analysis/development or for
customer delivery

Analyze data for both reporting development as well as trend identification,
event impact analysis, process measurement and
improvement, and observation/summarization for senior management attention

Conduct research and analysis and examine risk elements of disbursement
population to present trends, assess risk, and provide
automation recommendations to management

Report Design, Stakeholder Management, and Report Delivery

Utilize available applications/tools to design report drafts/mock-ups for
iterative stakeholder review

Identify, engage, and manage reporting stakeholder relationships to sustain
ongoing delivery and enhancement of customer
reporting; schedule and conduct reporting reviews with stakeholders for full
vision-draft-final delivery cycle

Prepare and communicate value of all reporting deliverables, and manage
stakeholder pressure that may result in duplicative or
excessive reporting development

Utilize available applications/tools to develop Ad-hoc/automated reporting for
all levels of the organization

Apply online for immediate consideration, please send your updated resume and contact info via email rohit.sheelvant@prolim.com or Contact (248) 8760896 Ext 225.

About PROLIM Corporation

PROLIM is a global company focused on product innovation by leveraging IT and PLM Technologies. PROLIM has more than a decade of PLM Service history – serving Automotive, Aerospace, High Tech and Industrial Machinery companies throughout the world.

Our Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) practice is powered by a team of consultants who provide comprehensive end-to-end service offerings. We have a PLM Center-of-Excellence (CoE) that enables our customers to build innovative solutions to the most-pressing PLM challenges. The CoE is supported by the right skills, resources, technologies and methodologies and helps develop customized solutions to better manage the entire product lifecycle.

For business related queries or job opportunities, contact us at toll-free number 888-9- PROLIM or email us at info@prolim.com,Digital S/W Eng Lead Analyst (Big data with SAS and PySpark background)

Share1

Job ID: FA-0100-579

Open Since: 2020-01-13

City: Irving
State: Texas
Country: United States of America

Job Description:


Frontend Arts brings together the brightest minds to create breakthrough technology solutions, helping our customers gain competitive advantage. At Frontend Arts, we are continuously evolving how we work and how we look at the business challenges, so we can continue to deliver measurable, sustainable solutions to our clients.

We are looking for a self-motivated "Digital S/W Eng Lead Analyst (Big data with SAS and PySpark background)" with excellent communication and customer service skills.

5+ years of experience with Hadoop (Cloudera) or Cloud Technologies Expert level building pipelines using Apache Beam or Spark Familiarity with core provider services from AWS, Azure or GCP, preferably having supported deployments on one or more of these platforms

Job Skills:
Experience with all aspects of DevOps (source control, continuous integration, deployments, etc.)
Experience with containerization and related technologies (e.g. Docker, Kubernetes)
Experience in other open-sources like Druid, Elastic Search, Logstash etc is a plus
· Advanced knowledge of the Hadoop ecosystem and Big Data technologies Hands-on experience with the Hadoop eco-system (HDFS, MapReduce, Hive, Pig, Impala, Spark, Kafka, Kudu, Solr)
Knowledge of agile(scrum) development methodology is a plus
Strong development/automation skills ¿ Proficient in programming in Java or Python with prior Apache Beam/Spark experience a plus.
System-level understanding - Data structures, algorithms, distributed storage & compute
Can-do attitude on solving complex business problems, good interpersonal and teamwork skills Required:
5+ years of experience with Hadoop (Cloudera) or Cloud Technologies Expert level building pipelines using
Minimum Experience: 5 Yrs

Education:

Bachelor’s degree from an accredited college/university or equivalent work experience,About Us

RMS' App Experience group is revolutionizing a $1 trillion global industry through a highly design-centric approach to problem-solving and app development. Our software solutions help to better understand risk events like catastrophes, terrorism, and cyber threats to create a more resilient and sustainable global society. What will you help to create?

The Role

We are looking for an experienced Data Analyst to join our Software Applications team. Using the latest analytics technologies and practices, you will identify new business opportunities across the RMS suite of applications and will help enhance the customer experience. Learnings you mine and generate using various data platforms will fuel RMS product roadmap to bring to market software solutions that delight and empower customers with making informed decisions of global impact. Visual reports you create and present to the RMS executives committee while transforming data into readable, results-oriented insights will guide RMS strategy for innovation and growth. This is a high-impact, high-visibility role that entails partnership with Product Management, Product Design, Engineering, Customer Success, Marketing, and Sales teams to create state-of-the-art commercial and consumer applications used by global customers every day. If you’re ready to dive deep into customer engagement needs and trends, and if you want huge challenges of global impact, we would love to talk to you.

In this role, you will:
Identify trends and opportunities for growth through analysis of complex data sets
Create, implement, and operationalize leading-edge analytic systems, transforming complex, large-scale business challenges into simple and efficient frameworks
Extract insights and form data-driven recommendations to guide innovation across multiple diverse products with trillion-dollar industry impact
Analyze and rapidly visualize executive-level insights to answer key questions from stakeholders and present strategic, business and technical impact of your directions
Evaluate RMS application and platform services for accuracy, efficiency, and operational excellence, while developing protocols for collecting, processing, and cleansing data
Develop and maintain databases from primary and secondary data sources, and build scripts to make our data evaluation process more flexible, scalable, open
Directly collaborate with Product Management, Design, Engineering, Marketing, Sales and Customer Success teams to extract business-critical data insights and stir execution across all channels
Create visually-compelling best-practice reports based on data mining, analysis, and visualization
Minimum Qualifications:
Bachelors degree in a quantitative field, such as Mathematics, Statistics, Economics, Information Management, Computer Science with Modeling/Data Science, or equivalent professional experience
5+ years of professional quantitative analysis experience with data warehousing, mining, processing, evaluating and visualizing data for customer insights, business, and market analysis
Hands-on experience working with metrics, reports, dashboards in Mixpanel and Google Analytics
3+ years of experience working with statistical packages (SAS, SPSS, Stata, MATLAB, etc.)
2+ years of experience developing data visualizations and actionable reporting dashboards using BI platforms such as Tableau, Looker, Qlik, Microsoft Power BI, Domo, or similar
2+ years of development experience, scripting with SQL on large data sets within distributed computing platforms such as Hive/Hadoop/Redshift or similar and designing ETL flows
Excellent communication skills - communicate clearly and distinctly, both verbally and in writing, to peers and stakeholders
Preferred Qualifications:
Master’s degree in a quantitative field
Demonstrable track record of scaling world-class products
Experience in SaaS and/or analytics platforms
Experience with large data sets and distributed computing (Hive/Hadoop)
Experience in functional or scripting language (R, JavaScript, PHP, Perl, Python, XML) or Haskell
Fortitude to execute across multiple, concurrent, high-impact initiatives in a fast-paced, technology-oriented environment
Strong project management and organizational skills
Proven success in a collaborative, team-oriented environment
Experience working with complex B2B industries, such as finance and/or insurance is a plus
RMS is an Equal Opportunity-Affirmative Action Employer-Minority/Female/Disability/Veteran/Gender Identity/Sexual Orientation,As the leader in Lead-to-Account Matching, Routing and Marketing Attribution solutions, LeanData drives growth for business. We help many of the world’s fastest-growing enterprises automate, simplify and accelerate revenue.

As a key part of our Operations team, you’ll be our first Business Intelligence hire. You will be able to manipulate and analyze large data sets to find trends, identify errors, and solve business challenges that are presented. You’ll be a key member in maintaining high level Company Metrics and Dashboards to ensure that goals and targets are being met. You’ll build insightful dashboards and provide expert analysis and forecasting using LeanData’s technology stack. You’ll have exceptional analytical skills, strong collaboration and communication skills. You will have the opportunity to work directly with the executive team and make a large impact via data driven analyses.
What you'll be doing:
Review data dumps and reports to identify opportunities for business improvements
Assist Revenue Operations to insure that sales data remain accurate as new processes are applied
Create a single source of truth for ARR, renewals, pipeline, and other revenue related data
Assist Engineering and Product to analyze trends in product usage
Build and deploy standardized Metrics and Dashboards for the Company leadership team
Support the Customer Success team in accurately tracking quarterly net retention metrics and expiring ARR
Define, track and create key business metrics to help assess the overall health of the business
Work effectively with cross-functional teams
Perform ad-hoc and in-depth analysis
Requirements:
2-5 years experience in business or data analytics
Experience in building dashboards and models
Strong capabilities in using Excel to manipulate data sets and identify errors
Ability to work independently and as a member of various cross-functional teams
Proven ability leveraging analytical and problem-solving skills in a fast paced environment
Strong communicator, both written and verbal
Bonus points if you have:
Experience working with Salesforce.com
Experience working at growth-stage company
Why work at LeanData:
LeanData covers employee insurance premiums up to 90%
Stock options in LeanData for all full-time employees
Flexible PTO
401K plan
We warmly welcome into the LeanData family all persons without regard to ethnic and racial identity, indigenous heritage, national origin, religion, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, age, disability, marital status, veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status.,Alteryx is revolutionizing data analytics by providing a complete end to end, self-service platform that allows users to get from business questions to business answers at incredible speeds. Why work for just any analytics company? At Alteryx, we are explorers, dreamers and innovators. We’re on a journey to build the best analytics platform in the world, but we can’t do it without people like you, leading the way. Forget the stereotypical tech companies of the past. Embrace the unconventional, exercise your imagination and help alter the future with Alteryx!

Here at Alteryx the Product Insights team supports our Product Management and Engineering organizations to take a data-based approach to decision making. As part of this team you will help to improve the Alteryx Platform by synthesizing product usage data to identify opportunities large and small and be a subject matter expert for usage questions. This role will be exposed to a unique blend of software engineering teams, product management teams, UX research teams, data scientists, data engineers and data analytics teams and will be called upon to present to leadership. We believe there is plenty of room for creativity in analytics and are looking for a motivated individual to curate metrics and dashboards that are referenced often. Consider yourself an internal consultant with new projects and questions to work on every week! This role will have support from experienced analytics professionals as mentors to further develop skills.

Responsibilities:
Understand the use cases for Alteryx products and apply critical thinking to support Product Managers in feature measurement and identifying user behavior patterns
Understand our data warehousing model, develop expertise with key internal data sources and, at times, teach others where to find relevant data
Work cross-functionally within the organization to serve multiple stakeholders, prioritize high value projects and serve requests consistently
Maintain and update organized catalog of analytical outputs and work with data engineering teams to promote data quality
Find opportunities to automate and streamline analytics pipelines to get to actionable insights faster
Qualifications:
Undergraduate degree, preferably in a quantitative field (Statistics, Economics, Econometrics, Physics, Data Science, Marketing Analytics, Business Analytics)
3+ years relevant professional experience as a data analyst or similar
Experience with Alteryx products including Alteryx Designer
Working knowledge of SQL statements and database query best practices
Knowledge of data visualization tools (Tableau, Qlik, etc.) to translate analytics to consumable outputs
Excellent written and verbal communication skills with some experience presenting technical concepts to all levels of an organization
Ability to think on your feet and problem solve
Ability to work in a fast-paced culture, managing multiple deliverables on a project basis
Preferred: 3+ years Software industry experience
Preferred: Alteryx Designer Core Certified
Preferred: Any experience with XML and JSON file formats
Perks:
100% company-paid medical, dental, and vision for associates
Health plans that cover your family and pets
Company matched 401(k)
Associate stock purchase plan
Paid time off: 3 weeks’ vacation, 5 sick days, 9 holidays, 3 floating holidays, and 20 hours volunteer time
100% paid parental leave
Tuition reimbursement
Wellness programs with up to $300 fitness reimbursement annually
Collaborative offices stocked with healthy snacks and drinks
Office events, catered lunches, and happy hours
#LI-MH1,As an AI Insights Data Analyst at Moveworks, you will distill prospective customer ticket data into insights to enable them making informed purchase decisions. You will take large amounts of data, create compelling and accurate visualizations, and present your findings to senior executives. You will develop a deep understanding of the challenges and opportunities of the prospective customers and help them to envisage the impact of Moveworks in their unique environments. As we scale, you will help to build a data pipeline for the presales analysis and drive continuous improvements in technical and business tools/processes.

We are looking for an experienced data analyst expert who will help us improve the quality and velocity of the presales analysis, make the product better and help the customers thrive.

What will you do?
Utilize Moveworks algorithms, as well as off-the-shelf Business Intelligence tools, to provide insights to prospect customers and internal teams
Assist the sales team by crafting visualizations and pitch decks that tell the future customers a compelling story about their historic data, as well as highlighting Moveworks' value proposition
Work with the product manager and customer success team to identify & prioritize opportunity areas to configure Moveworks skills for existing customers
Build highly scalable data pipelines and clean datasets around key business metrics
Focus on improving data quality and anomaly detection to increase trust in data
Automate the process of analyzing data and visualizing results, both for the sales teams, as well as for core Product teams
What do you bring to the table?
3+ years of experience in a Business Analyst / Business Intelligence role
Expertise in Tableau, Python (SQL is a plus), AWS, Airflow (or equivalent workflow mgmt platforms)
Expertise in data modeling, ETL, and data warehousing concepts
Experience in a startup and/or consulting environment is desirable
Self-motivated with the ability to work independently
Strong communication and organizational skills
Proven track-record of working with business
Who we are


Moveworks is an AI first company with a singular focus: fully autonomous resolution of all enterprise IT. We are building a state of the art platform that combines natural language understanding, conversational interface, and automation to enable hundreds of millions of knowledge workers get work done faster. Our engineers built foundational systems are companies like Google, Amazon, LinkedIn, and Facebook, and we are now applying our expertise to build a first of its kind enterprise machine learning platform.

While we currently resolve 15-35% of all IT related requests autonomously at companies like Broadcom and Autodesk, we are just getting started. Our vision is to build a single AI platform where employees can come for help whenever they need anything from their respective companies - ranging from HR related help, facilities, legal, and more. This is all delivered through a conversational interface like Slack, Teams, or Google Chat for a fast, delightful, and frictionless user experience.

As we scale globally, there's plenty of space for you to grow with us. You'll be part of a team that thinks in terms of we, not I. Together, we're focused on simplifying life for millions of people around the world in their most pressing hours of the day by giving them an effortless, magical way to resolve issues -- all powered by a strong form of AI.,Data Analyst

Share

Job ID: FA-0100-618

Open Since: 2020-02-05

City: San Jose
State: California
Country: United States of America

Job Description:


Frontend Arts brings together the brightest minds to create breakthrough technology solutions, helping our customers gain a competitive advantage. At Frontend Arts, we are continuously evolving how we work and how we look at the business challenges, so we can continue to deliver measurable, sustainable solutions to our clients.

We are looking for a self-motivated "Data Analyst" with excellent communication and customer service skills.

Job Skills:
Experience with data management, specifically with validating and auditing data and reports from multiple systems
Experience manipulating large data sets through statistical software
Experience processing and analyzing data sets, interpreting them for making business decisions
3+ years of experience with R, Python, or a similar scripting language
Minimum Experience: 8 Yrs

Education:

Bachelor’s degree from an accredited college/university or equivalent work experience,Join us as we pursue our disruptive new vision to make machine data accessible, usable and valuable to everyone. We are a company filled with people who are passionate about our product and seek to deliver the best experience for our customers. At Splunk, we're committed to our work, our customers, having fun, and most importantly to each other's success. Learn more about Splunk careers and how you can become a part of the journey!RoleThe People Analytics team ensures data driven decision-making throughout the People organization. We provide critical support to the business around issues of organizational health, employee engagement, measurement of program effectiveness and blue sky thinking for all things related to People. As a member of the team, you'll be detail-oriented and conscientious, analytical and curious. You're a strong problem-solver, who uses both quantitative and qualitative methods to get things done. And most importantly, you are someone who wonders "What if?" and are relentless in seeking out the solution. You will play an important role in how we "bring data to everything" with your expertise and passion to help address the data and analytical needs of teams and clients across the globe. Your knowledge of People data, along with deep business context, will enable you to provide action-oriented analyses to ensure our People organization and Business Leaders are well-informed and able to make thoughtful, data-driven People decisions.Responsibilities* Empower leaders and organizations by providing high quality and timely reporting, analyses and actionable insights.* Manipulate and analyze large and complex data sets to distill insights from data; connect disparate ideas into cohesive, well-grounded recommendations using creative, effective, structured and analytical thinking.* Design, develop and automate self-service dashboards and analytics solutions for Business Leaders and Managers at scale.* Orchestrate expert level data visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.* Enable Leaders with insights to continue to make Splunk a more diverse and inclusive workplace.* Serve as key thought leader internally with People team COEs to deliver analytics and insights on programs for Performance, Rewards and Talent Development.* Continually develop new models and methods for evaluating existing data or correlating new to existing data sources for intuitive reporting solutions.* Drive strategic use of data to help increase value of the People Analytics function.* Be disruptive in your space by finding creative ways to provide innovative solutions despite limited data resources.Requirements* Bachelor's degree in Economics, Statistics, Finance, Social Science, Psychology, or another field that uses quantitative analysis or equivalent practical experience* 8+ years of experience within a Talent or People Analytics function* 5+ years Workday experience including experience with advanced reporting and calculated fields* Experience with analytics and visualization tools, such as Tableau or Workday Prism* Strong experience with regression analysis and other statistical modeling techniques* Familiarity with data warehouses, SQL and the ability to query, join and transform data from multiple sources* Experience owning complex projects involving multiple teams* Experience managing relationships with clients and presenting to audiences at different levels Ability to work cohesively in a team-oriented environmentFor job positions in San Francisco, CA, and other locations where required, we will consider for employment qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records.We value diversity at our company. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or any other applicable legally protected characteristics in the location in which the candidate is applying.,We are the Gen-Next technology solution provider, solving complex business problems. We assist our happy customers across all spectrum to reimagine their business processes and navigate their digital journey. Our out-of-the-box solutions continue to bridge the gap between ideas and reality, delivering impact through connected data, architecture and experience.
WE ARE ENQUERO - DIGITALLY TRANSFORMING businesses since 2014!
Excellence with Enquero
We are a vibrant and a ridiculously norm-challenging bunch with increasingly diverse teams across the globe. Our open culture enables easy ideation, innovation and delivery. Our voracious appetite for knowledge makes growth organic to us.
If you have a passion for problem solving and quirkiness doesn’t scare you, come be a part of our rapidly growing company. Oh! we do have a life outside work as well.

As a Lead Consultant in Enquero’s Transformation Plus unit, you will be expected to provide objective assistance on the strategy, structure, management & operations of an organization, in support of identified business purposes & objectives. You will be expected to focus on a specified business topic, such as new business ventures, cost reduction, mergers or product launches and business process optimizations. You are also expected to be adept in software programming and the development of information systems design, system analysis and information business strategies and be responsible for running a specific area of business activity that deliver strategic objectives.
You will build relationships with stakeholders and clients: Provide advice, assistance, and guidance in their area of specialization. You will manage projects through their planning, procurement, provision, delivery and maintenance cycle.Your demonstrated ability to consistently achieve this while continuing to improve your knowledge and skills will define success for your role.
Work with cross-functional, geographically dispersed teams to improve, define and manage new business processes and help develop overall technology solution design.
Assess existing processes and make improvement recommendations based on customer experience, cycle time and risk/reward analysis.
Assess and define business problems, identify options, assemble and analyze relevant supporting data, and shape recommendations for management approval
Determining methods and procedures on new tasks, establishing these for the assignment and coordinating activities with other employees while leading a small team and demonstrating a good leadership within the team
Coordinate meetings with clients, document and distribute meeting minutes, ensure actions items are completed on time, communicate project status, escalate issues to management as appropriate. The scope of engagement can be highly variable & can include core strategy development, large scale implementation & process optimization.
Collaborate with leaders, business analysts, project managers, IT architects, technical leads and other developers, along with internal and external customers, to understand requirements and develop needs according to business requirements
Be a thought leader, understand the latest trends and capabilities to implement modern and successful solutions and enforce industry standards, principles and practices.
Contributing to your BU/Practice by
Documenting your learnings from the current work and engaging in the external tech community by writing blogs, contributing in Github, Stack overflow, meetups / conferences etc.
Keep updated on the latest technologies with technology trainings and certifications
Actively participate in organization level activities and events related to learning, formal training, interviewing, special projects etc.

Required:
Bachelor’s Degree
8-14 years of relevant experience
Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization & data modeling
Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera
Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage.
Excellent interpersonal, organizational, and communication skills and the ability to work effectively in a diverse corporate and client environment
Demonstrated success presenting complex findings in a clear and compelling manner
Ability to document, plan and track project tasks; ensure accuracy and validation of results produced as a result of data analysis.
Perform process modeling, carryout fit-gap analysis and translate requirements to related technology solution design and conduct design workshops for management.
Ability to effectively plan and lead the correct processes to reach conclusions/consensus in a facilitated meeting and positively handle disruptive or hostile participants.
Be a team player on client engagement teams, working under the supervision of a Principal Consultant/Director, to develop work product, lead specific project initiatives, and act as a subject matter expert on consulting projects.
Knowledge of the various levels of listening, ability to choose the right level depending on the situation & ability to objectively restate the opinions of others.
Ability to select and use appropriate tools for the job and perform technical research as required to supplement and support Enquero methodologies in delivering solutions to clients.
Detail and action-oriented self-starter who is highly organized and methodical in approaching and processing to data and information.
Basic knowledge of sales and product management principles and practices a plus.
Superb written and oral communication skills.
Expert level Microsoft Excel and financial modeling skills.
Shows a passion for business analytics, modeling and planning.
Aptitude for quickly ramping up on new technology and processes.
Clear understanding of open source technology components and their usage in building technology led capabilities for business use.
Proven track record of delivering projects on time and on budget while communicating with stakeholders. Experience with project management tools/systems a plus.
Outstanding integrity and the ability to always seek to do the right thing for the client and the Firm.
Ability to think globally and discuss multiple aspects and impacts of issues. Ability to respect and appreciate different personality styles, thinking, backgrounds, and cultures.

This job description is intended to describe the general nature of the work performed by employees in this job. It is not an exhaustive list of all the job's responsibilities. At Enquero, all of our jobs include broad responsibilities for continually improving the processes we use to develop our products.
Enquero is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.,We are the Gen-Next technology solution provider, solving complex business problems. We assist our happy customers across all spectrum to reimagine their business processes and navigate their digital journey. Our out-of-the-box solutions continue to bridge the gap between ideas and reality, delivering impact through connected data, architecture and experience.
WE ARE ENQUERO - DIGITALLY TRANSFORMING businesses since 2014!
Excellence with Enquero
We are a vibrant and a ridiculously norm-challenging bunch with increasingly diverse teams across the globe. Our open culture enables easy ideation, innovation and delivery. Our voracious appetite for knowledge makes growth organic to us.
If you have a passion for problem solving and quirkiness doesn’t scare you, come be a part of our rapidly growing company. Oh! we do have a life outside work as well.

Translate business requirements into tangible solution specifications and high quality, on time deliverables.
Partner with different stakeholders and execute proof of concepts to assess the value of solutions.
Should be able to do reverse engineering to understand and derive the functional knowledge
Experience in end to end development of a new set of reports, dashboards & KPI Scorecards
Analyze large volumes of transactional data to generate insights and actionable recommendations to drive business growth.
Automate data analysis and insight generation.
Collaborate with other team members and lead project development.
Passion for knowing for emerging trends and identifying relevant opportunities.
Demonstrate ability to think strategically about business, product, and technical challenges
Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization
Analytical/Problem Solving skills.
Apply quality control, data validation, and cleansing processes to new and existing data sources.
Support User Acceptance Testing for production applications
Support a high-performance workplace
Self-motivated with a proven track record of innovation and successful delivery.
Ability to work independently, fast paced and deadline-driven environment.
Excellent communication, presentation and Analytical skills
Drive customer communication during critical events and participate/lead various operational improvement initiatives.
Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera
Knowledge of ETL and expertise in any BI tools Power BI, Tableau, SFDC Einstein Analytics, QlikSense, Qlikview, OBIEE, SAP Analytics Cloud, Kibana etc.,
Strong Tableau Administration and dashboard migration experience
Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage.
Hands-on experience in data modelling, programming, querying, data mining and report development using large volumes of granular data to deliver business intelligence and custom reporting solutions
Determining methods and procedures on new assignments, establishing these for the assignment and coordinating activities with other employees while leading a small team.
Contributing to your Department by
Documenting your learnings from the current work to produce an artifact such as an internal Wiki, a blog or a best practices document
Actively participating in Department level group activities and events related to learning, formal training, interviewing, special projects, knowledge sharing etc.

Required:
Bachelor’s Degree
5-9 years of relevant experience
Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization & data modeling
Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera
Knowledge of ETL and expertise in BI tools, Power BI, Tableau, QlikSense, Qlikview, OBIEE, SAP BO
Strong Tableau Administration and dashboard migration experience, Tableau upgrade experience
Preferred:
Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage.

This job description is intended to describe the general nature of the work performed by employees in this job. It is not an exhaustive list of all the job's responsibilities. At Enquero, all of our jobs include broad responsibilities for continually improving the processes we use to develop our products.
Enquero is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.,Data Strategy Analyst (a.k.a. Curation Optimization Specialist)
GroupBy is looking for a talented Data Strategy Analyst (or what we call our Curation Optimization Specialist) who will be the owner of our client data strategy and automation initiatives. This person will be our product data specialist charged with producing and monitoring the quality of our client data strategies before passing it on to our curation engine.
To ensure the highest level of data quality from the beginning of a customer engagement onward, you will create and refine all the necessary rules to manage curation tasks efficiently.
Organization is key for you, as you assess client data on page and within product feeds to determine a holistic plan to automate how it's retrieved while maintaining its integrity and quality.
You obsess on how to make data category and data retrieval as optimized as possible. You identify gaps in data coverage, misclassified content, redundant and/or ineffective categorization rules then fix it.
Because of your ongoing keyword discovery and expansion of the rule library, you’re working with the Engineering and Machine Learning teams to create new features to improve data.
You will partner with the Ecommerce Strategist and Taxonomist teams to make immediate changes and improvements to each step of the data enrichment process as needed to maintain data quality.
Who we are
e-Commerce has come a long way. Within hours you can set up an online shop and make your first sale. However, despite all the advances, e-Commerce becomes really hard at a certain scale. What if you want to search 10 million products globally, from hundreds of vendors, in 20 languages, being updated 100s of times per minute, while providing a personalized experience to each customer? That's where GroupBy comes in.

GroupBy exists to solve the tough problems in e-Commerce. We work with the biggest players in the industry and take on their most complex challenges. We've built a cloud-based, data-driven eCommerce platform that provides all the building blocks for a great online shopping experience: Product data enrichment, intelligent search and suggestions, personalization, analytics and recommendations.

We solve these problems by surrounding ourselves with people who love what they do, and are given the freedom to excel at it. Our team is comprised of passionate, innovative thinkers who work together to create groundbreaking products. We like working with awesome people, and we love helping these people become even better. We invest in your growth as a professional with open workshops and a self-directed training allowance. We believe these to be essential for solving tough problems.

We are very proud of the culture and diversity at GroupBy. You will be part of a company with open office spaces, free biweekly lunches, monthly social events, a cupboard full of snacks and beverages, flexible hours, and a games room.

Learn more about who we are by visiting www.groupbyinc.com

How We Operate
We embrace microservice at an organizational level, where teams of up to 6 engineers work on loosely-coupled components to deliver sophisticated features.
We embrace a modern dev-ops culture, where core product engineers work hand-in-hand with site reliability engineers and other teams to operate, monitor, troubleshoot and frequently update our critical production systems.
We work with our product owners to understand our roadmap, align the architecture with business goals on the horizon, and discuss challenges while grooming and refining our backlog.

Skills you Have
Communication and Team Building: You can communicate effectively within a team, and have a knack for working with people, not just data.
Technical Expertise: You can apply data mining techniques, analytics and information retrieval methods with your eyes closed. Additionally, your experience in writing SQL queries, pulling and manipulating data helps you stay organized.
Passion and Autonomy: You love what you do, and take every opportunity to excel at it, explore new grounds and learn something new, and propose improvements.
Adaptability: You understand how our industry works, and you’ve learned to juggle, re-prioritize, and execute on the fly as the situation changes.
A love of learning: You have a desire to continue to build on your technical capabilities to continue to master your craft.
Curious Spirit: You seek to understand what you are creating and why it’s important.

Your Technical Experience
Completed a Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent in Information Sciences, Statistics or a related degree.
1+ years hands-on experience in data analytics, text mining, machine learning, and/or AI
Development experience with R and/or Python
Capable of writing SQL and understanding data structures
Excellent MS Excel skills, with some experience working with large, structured databases, building dashboards and reports in any data visualization software such as DataStudio, Power BI, Tableau, etc.
Exceptional written, oral and communication skills with the ability to work independently and proactively

Nice to Have
Some project management experience
Understanding of mass merchandising, retail, e-commerce and multi-channel retailing
SaaS experience is strongly preferred

What are you waiting for? Come join our team!,We're looking for a highly motivated, analytical mind to surface powerful insights from the data-rich Bazaarvoice network. As a Senior Data Analyst, you'll use a combination of web analytics, statistical analysis and data mining techniques to help our clients better understand how their customers engage with consumer-generated content. The Senior Data Analyst should be able to identify and facilitate the measurement of KPIs, determine whether experimental features should be launched, and measure the impact of Bazaarvoice across the network. You should be passionate about surfacing undiscovered patterns in data and using quantitative analysis to answer complex questions. You should have a strong background in making sense of large sets of data and delivering actionable insights based on your analyses.
What you will be doing:

Analyze the world's largest shopper data network, both structured and unstructured data sets
Partner with Product & Engineering teams to build data-driven Products that deliver real-time actionable insights to our clients
Publish impactful Consumer-generated Content & Consumer Shopping Behavior Benchmarks and Research
Study the factors underlying Consumer Shopping Behavior and drivers of purchase decisions through data mining techniques like regression, clustering/classification, time series and text analysis
Perform experiments to test data-driven hypotheses and KPI measurements to support new Product metric tracking
Develop methodology, sophisticated queries, and self-service reporting to prove the ROI of each Product/Feature
Create informative visualization that intuitively display large amounts of data and/or complex relationships
Develop actionable insights and recommendations on the measurement / tracking of KPIs and the Bazaarvoice solution through both web analytics and internal big data platforms
Drive Analytics & Data Science best practices across our Products and company
Who you are:

BS in Management Information Systems, Statistics, Math, Operations Research, Computer Science, or another quantitative discipline
4+ years proven work experience in a technical analytics role working with big data
3+ years experience and an expert in HQL, MySQL or PostgreSQL
Proficient in a scripting language (preferably Python or R)
3+ years experience in applying data mining techniques (regression, neural network, decision tree, market basket analysis, time series and forecasting, clustering and segmentation, text mining and principal component analysis)
1+ years experience and proficiency in advanced web analytics and A/B testing
Strong ability to communicate complex findings clearly and concisely to a non-technical audience

About Bazaarvoice

Bazaarvoice connects brands and retailers to consumers, so that every shopping experience feels personal. From search and discovery to purchase and advocacy, Bazaarvoice's solutions reach in-market shoppers, personalize their experiences, and give them the confidence to buy. Each month in the Bazaarvoice Network, more than a billion consumers view and share authentic content including reviews, questions and answers, and social photos across 6,000 brand and retail websites.

Bazaarvoice completed the acquisition of Influenster in August 2019 and with the 2 companies coming together we are able to create an even more attractive proposition for our clients.
Influenster is a digital destination where consumers discover products and reviews that enable them to make well-informed purchase decisions with over 6 million members who have written over 38 million product reviews.

Founded in 2005, Bazaarvoice is headquartered in Austin, Texas with offices in North America, Europe, and Australia. For more information, visit

.

Why join Bazaarvoice?
We're committed to client success: There are over 5K brand and retail websites in the Bazaarvoice network. Our clients represent some of the world's leading companies across a wide range of industries including retail, apparel, automotive, consumer electronics and travel.
We're leaders in consumer-generated content: Each month, more than one-half billion consumers view and share authentic consumer-generated content, such as ratings and reviews, curated photos, social posts and videos, about products in our network. Last year, 135K reviews were submitted each day.
Our network delivers: Network analytics provide insights that help marketers and advertisers provide more engaging experiences that drive brand awareness, consideration, sales, and loyalty.
We're a great place to work: We pride ourselves on our unique culture. Join a company that values passion, innovation, authenticity, generosity, respect, teamwork, and performance.
Commitment to diversity and inclusion

Bazaarvoice provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all team members and applicants according to their experience, talent, and qualifications for the job without regard to race, color, national origin, religion, age, disability, sex (including pregnancy, gender stereotyping, and marital status), sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information, military/veteran status, or any other category protected by federal, state, or local law in every location in which the company has facilities. Bazaarvoice believes that diversity and an inclusive company culture are key drivers of creativity, innovation and performance. Furthermore, a diverse workforce and the maintenance of an atmosphere that welcomes versatile perspectives will enhance our ability to fulfill our vision of creating the world's smartest network of consumers, brands, and retailers.,Job Description
Olive is healthcares first intelligent digital workforce and has been successfully deployed at numerous healthcare systems across the country. Olive helps streamline and automate the most high-volume, repetitive tasks so healthcare professionals can concentrate on their patients and solving healthcares most challenging problems. Olives promise to her customers is that she finds out where she can make an impact, onboards quickly, shows up to work everyday, does her job extremely well, and gets smarter over time.Omega is Olives digital workforce operations center dedicated to ensuring that Olive keeps her promise, by providing support, analysis, communications, and continual improvements to all live customer bots.The Data Analyst at Olive is part of Omegas rapidly growing Omega Analysis team. With Olive being deployed across the country, the Data Analyst will work cross-functionally to help make Olive more efficient and elevate customer insights to internal stakeholders. The Data Analyst will perform data manipulation and in-depth analysis of complex health care data to produce analysis on customer quality, utilization and outcomes. The ideal candidate is inquisitive, creative, self-driven and flexible with the ability to work within a dynamic high-growth startup environment.

Requirements
Bachelors degree in Mathematics, Economics, Computer Science, Statistics, or equivalent professional experience
0-3 years of professional experience in data analysis, data management and manipulation, report writing, and/or database design
Technical expertise regarding data modeling, database development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong working knowledge of databases (Amazon Redshift and Athena), and querying languages (SQL)
Experience building data visualizations using tools like Tableau or similar
Ability to analyze large data sets and collect insights in a fast-paced, agile environment
Experience with predictive analysis and statistical methods
Previous experience with analytical programing languages (Python, R) and related data manipulation packages (Pandas, Numpy, dplyr, tidyr) is a plus,pureIntegration is seeking a Data Analyst I (strenght with Salesforce.com) who will help guide and improve the way that businesses' management staff foster collaboration within and between departments. Those who desire to work as a Data Analyst should demonstrate a strong understanding of managerial and professional skill sets. Core Responsibilities The Data Analyst I Role Strongly prefer working knowledge of Salesforce.com. Looking for entry level data analyst who will work with client marketing team on Renewal project 3.0, help impute contract expiration date, prepare lists for sellers, re-run lists regularly to capture any renewals, prep lists for client communications, prep lists for Billing team for rate action, etc. bull Clean, sort and update client list to most up to date account owner. bull Upload client list on RSL and manage renewal lead progress. bull Create weekly report on RSL progress. bull Communicate with seller on their renewal progress and follow up. bull Confirm client removal from the rate action list once they renewed their contract. bull Confirm client contract data in SF. bull Submit client list to Billing for rate action and provide final report. Location Charlotte, NC Requirements 3+ years of experience. Bachelor's Degree or equivalent Expert knowledge of Microsoft office Excel, PowerPoint, Word Outlook. Working knowledge of Visio is preferred Excellent written oral communication skills. Communication is of paramount importance in this role, including in-person and on the phone meetings, highly technical and accurate detailing in emails, note taking and other reports, and scrutiny in reviewing contracts in play Are you self-motivated, collaborative, and client-focused? Are you looking for a challenging and rewarding career? Then pureIntegration would love to hear from you! Your career journey starts here! pureIntegration, a systems integration company headquartered in the DC area, serves clients in the fastest growing industries - communications, media, and entertainment. Our industry-focused offerings and collaborative client approach has resulted in a 97 client satisfaction rating. As a leading service organization, we recognize our most valuable assets are our people, both as individuals and how they come together as a whole. As such, we encourage our team members to become fearless in exploring ideas and opportunities to act on them,Job Description
Job description

Strong ability to examine physical data and infer relationships to business context and requirements

Strong understanding of LEAN AGILE or other iterative development methodologies with practical exposure to these techniques

Ability to write SQL against various DB management systems: Oracle, Teradata, HIVE, Impala, SQL Server

7+ years of experience in financial services

Direct participation/support of technical delivery

Data preparation

Data management

Global Markets subject matter expertise

Data Dictionary Management

Blueprint,Software powers the world, and LaunchDarkly empowers all teams to deliver and control the best software. We serve hundreds of billions of feature flags daily, to help teams ship better software, faster and eliminate risk for companies big and small.

We're based in downtown Oakland and growing quickly. You'll help us tackle some of the most challenging engineering problems around, like how can we deliver feature flags to hundreds of millions of users in milliseconds without breaking the bank.

About the role:
We are looking for an experienced Data Analyst to join our team at LaunchDarkly. We are growing rapidly, and need reliable and efficient answers for questions that are key to our future. You'll help develop the data, process and insights to power our next stage of growth.

We are searching for a talented Analyst to help us understand business critical data and leverage it across the entire organization. If you are data curious, excited about digging deeply into business data, and motivated by having an impact on the whole company, we want to hear from you.
Responsibilities:
Help create a data practice for the entire company.
Help ensure a data pipeline that is trustworthy and reliable.
Work with stakeholders around the business to understand their needs.
Help stakeholders ask good questions and get valuable insights.
Help answer the business' most pressing questions in repeatable, reliable ways.
Build tools and teach people how to find answers to their own questions
Qualifications:
2 or more years of experience in a hands-on Data Analytics role
Experience conducting data intensive analysis.
A visceral need to dive into data inconsistencies to pinpoint issues.
Product- and market-awareness to jump in and quickly understand LaunchDarkly's position and goals.
Expertise in SQL and proficiency in another data programming language (Python, R, etc.).
You may also know (bonus skills):
Experience in both enterprise and consumer environments.
LaunchDarkly is a Feature Management Platform that serves hundreds of billions of feature flags daily to help software teams build better software, faster. Feature flagging is an industry standard methodology of wrapping a new or risky section of code or infrastructure change with a flag. Each flag can easily be turned off independent of code deployment (aka "dark launching"). LaunchDarkly has SDKs for all major web and mobile platforms. We are building a diverse team so that we can offer robust products and services. Our team culture is dynamic, friendly, and supportive. Our headquarters are in Oakland.

At LaunchDarkly, we believe in the power of teams. We're building a team that is humble, open, collaborative, respectful and kind. We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.

LaunchDarkly offers:
Full Medical, Dental & Vision insurance
Unlimited vacation
Flexible schedule & work environment
Conference & meetups as an opportunity for everyone
A yearly education stipend for conferences and classes on your own
A budget to personalize your work station,Doximity is transforming the healthcare industry. Our mission is to help doctors be more productive, informed, and connected. As a Data Analyst, you'll work within cross-functional delivery teams alongside other analysts, engineers, and product managers in discovering data insights to help improve healthcare.

Our team brings a diverse set of technical and cultural backgrounds and we like to think pragmatically in choosing the tools most appropriate for the job at hand.

About Us
Here are some of the ways we bring value to doctors
Our data stack run on Python, Snowflake, Spark, and Airflow
Our web applications are built primarily using Ruby, Rails, JavaScript (Vue.js), and a bit of Golang
We have over 350 private repositories in Github containing our applications, forks of gems, our own internal gems, and open-source projects
We have worked as a distributed team for a long time; we're currently about 65% distributed
Find out more information on the Doximity engineering blog
Our company core values
Our recruiting process
Our product development cycle
Our on-boarding & mentorship process
Here's How You Will Make an Impact
Collaborate with a team of product managers, analysts and other developers to define and complete data projects from data ingestion, to analysis to recommendations.
Show off your engineering skills by creating data products from scratch and automating code so they can be re-used continually.
Leverage Doximity's extensive datasets to identify and classify behavioral patterns of medical professionals on our platform.
Play a key role in creating both product and client-facing analytics.
Grow into a presentation/communication-focused role or dive deeper into more-involved technical challenges - the choice is yours.
About you
B.S. or M.S. in quantitative field with 2-4 years of experience.
Working knowledge of statistics and visualization.
Expert SQL skills with proven ability to create and to evaluate complex SQL statements involving numerous tables and complex relationships.
Fluent in Python and experience using common modules (numpy, pandas, statsmodels, matplotlib) for EDA.
Excellent communication skills to explain your results and solutions to the stakeholders in a clear and compelling way.
Understanding of Object Oriented principles and testing as it relates to Data and Python.
Comfortable with UNIX command line interface and standard programming tools (vim/emacs, git, etc.)
Excellent problem solving skills and a strong attention to detail.
Ability to manage time well and prioritize incoming tasks from different stakeholders.
Fast learner; curiosity about and passion for data.
Preferred Qualifications:
Experience with Amazon Web Services products (EC2, S3, Snowflake).
Prior exposure to workflow management tools (Airflow).
Prior exposure to machine learning techniques (regressors, classifiers, etc).
Experience leveraging Apache Spark to perform analyses or process data.
Benefits
Doximity has industry leading benefits. For an updated list, see our career page
More info on Doximity

We're thrilled to be named the Fastest Growing Company in the Bay Area, and one of Fast Company's Most Innovative Companies. Joining Doximity means being part of an incredibly talented and humble team. We work on amazing products that over 70% of US doctors (and over one million healthcare professionals) use to make their busy lives a little easier. We're driven by the goal of improving inefficiencies in our $3.5 trillion U.S. healthcare system and love creating technology that has a real, meaningful impact on people's lives. To learn more about our team, culture, and users, check out our careers page, company blog, and engineering blog. We're growing steadily, and there's plenty of opportunity for you to make an impact.

Doximity is proud to be an equal opportunity employer, and committed to providing employment opportunities regardless of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status, sex, gender, gender identity, gender expression, pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding, age, sexual orientation, military or veteran status, or any other protected classification. We also consider qualified applicants with criminal histories, consistent with applicable federal, state and local law.,Company Description:
Angaza is a venture-backed company that is tackling global energy poverty by enabling financing of solar power for off-grid consumers. We have developed a mix of hardware and software solutions for some of the most demanding and dynamic markets in the world. We are for-profit, based in San Francisco, California and Nairobi, Kenya, and focused on aiming market forces at the linked challenges of climate change and global development.

Role Summary:
Looking for an opportunity to use your analytical skills and business insight to alleviate poverty and empower people to choose safe, clean energy? You will help us use data to focus internal priorities, drive business decisions, and benefit our customer base. You will develop a subject matter expertise in patterns of Pay-As-You-Go Distributor success in order to serve internal stakeholders, customers, and external partners with quality analytics and business intelligence products. Angaza is building a modern analytics practice around a deep commitment to our core values, high-quality tools, proven development practices, and a philosophy of continuous professional improvement, and we need you to help us make that vision a reality!

Outcomes:
Identify and surface significant trends and insights in high-impact BI products aimed at internal, customer, and partner audiences.
Empower internal teams with:
Data transformations and ETL pipelines to support downstream analytics and data needs
Forecasts on which to base compensation targets, financial planning, and prioritization
Rich, interactive data visualization tools to assist in self-service analytics
Customer-facing analytics and data products

Competencies:
Proficiency creating ETL & analytics products in Python (It would be useful to have experience in: NumPy, Pandas, psycopg2 or other SQL interface, a visualization library of your choice, and scikit-learn, as well as practical experience managing a data warehouse)
Strong SQL skills (Angaza currently uses PostgreSQL & Redshift)
Ability to design an efficient data model for use within modern BI tools (Angaza uses Qlik Sense internally)
Understanding of applied statistics & common modelling techniques in a business context
Possess strong business insight and appreciation of the challenges facing growing businesses.

You:
Thrive in a cooperative, dynamic environment
Are passionate about beautifully presented data that communicates complex information in a straightforward way
Have strong quantitative, problem-solving, and project management skills
Demonstrate excellent written and verbal communication skills
Pride yourself on attention to detail
Exhibit a strong tendency towards self-management
Exemplify Angaza’s key values: maximizing impact, empathetic, courageous, trustworthy, curious, and collaborative

Recommended Experience:
We recognize there are many paths to success in analytics, but we suspect the strongest candidates will have at least two years experience in at least one of the following categories:
Supporting executive decision-making through descriptive and statistical analysis at an early-stage organization
Evaluating patterns of customer growth at a B2B SaaS company
Product management or engineering

Benefits:
Competitive health benefits including medical, dental, vision, life, disability, HSA, & FSA
401(k) with company match
Fully paid parental leave
Flexible scheduling and time off policies
Knowledge that you’re making a positive impact on the world every day you come to work!

To Apply:
Use the form below to send us your contact details and resume.

Employment Eligibility:
Due to the nature of this role and our maturity as a company, all applicants must have permanent work authorization prior to applying. We are not able to sponsor or transfer employment visas (e.g. H-1B).

Our Commitment to DEI:
At Angaza, we evaluate all candidates on the basis of their ability to meet stated job requirements. We do not discriminate against candidates on the basis of sex, gender, marital status, religion, nationality, or other personal characteristics. In keeping with our commitment to supporting a safe and inclusive workplace, we strongly encourage candidates from traditionally underrepresented backgrounds to apply.,Snowflake started with a clear vision: develop a cloud data platform that is effective, affordable, and accessible to all data users. Snowflake developed an innovative new product with a built-for-the-cloud architecture that combines the power of data warehousing, the flexibility of big data platforms, and the elasticity of the cloud at a fraction of the cost of traditional solutions. We are now a global, world-class organization with offices in more than a dozen countries and serving many more.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
Interface with engineers, product managers & product analysts to understand data needs and help build visualization in our internal Snowflake data warehouse
Support the set-up of roles, schemas, & data pipelines while adhering to security policies and overcoming security restrictions.
Storytelling - Translate data and analysis into a story to help drive decisions across the organization
Build & maintain Executive Dashboards reporting on key metrics for IT and other business units.
Generate organizational health Executive dashboards
Foster collaboration among engineering, security compliance, IT & other business groups to ensure data is secure and audit-able.
Train distributed team members in data visualization.WHAT YOU WILL NEED:
5+ years of experience in Data warehousing, data modeling, and SQL .
2+ years of experience in MPP or Cloud data warehouse solutions like Snowflake, Redshift, BigQuery or Teradata
4+ years of experience building visualizations using tools like Looker, Tableau, etc.
Strong communication and cross functional collaboration skillsPREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS:
B.S or MS in Computer Science or equivalent practical experience.
2+ years experience in working with data pipelines in Python/Java & SQL
Experience in ETL tools is nice to have.
Snowflake is growing fast, and we're scaling our team to help enable and accelerate our growth. We are looking for people who share our values, challenge ordinary thinking, and push the pace of innovation while building a future for themselves and Snowflake.
How do you want to make your impact?

Snowflake is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, color, gender identity or expression, marital status, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, race, religion, pregnancy, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.,We are an ambitious, well-funded, high-growth global technology company transforming the hotel industry. At Duetto, we are passionate about creating innovative solutions to help hoteliers thrive. Although we work hard and operate at "Duetto speed," the work atmosphere is casual, flexible, collaborative, and most of all, fun.

We are seeking a unicorn to join our industry leading technology team co-founded by the former CTO of salesforce.com. Our technology stack includes Java server technologies, NoSql, Github, single­ page JavaScript web techniques, and patent­-pending analytical methods on top of MongoDB and AWS.

As a Data Analyst in the Analytics team, you will collaborate closely with engineers, data scientists and product managers to build the next generation data models, algorithms and insights that help customers (hotels, resorts, casinos, etc.) to maximize their revenue. You are the domain expert and bring to the table your industry experience, analytical skills, and deep knowledge of the relevant data to solve optimization problems such as demand forecasting and dynamic pricing.

Desired Skills & Expertise
Expert in core revenue management concepts such as demand forecasting, yield management, pricing, channel optimization, etc, ideally from the hospitality or airline industry.
Experience in utilizing a wide array of datasets to construct models for demand room, revenue forecasting and optimization, possibly including working with constrained inventory models such as hotel rooms, airline seats, or ad tech.
Experience using SQL and statistical computer languages such as R or Python to manipulate data and draw insights from large and complex datasets.
Experience in using data visualization tools such as Tableau for large datasets.
Knowledge of statistical techniques and concepts such as time-series data especially related to hospitality or other "exploding inventory".
Nice to have knowledge of machine learning techniques or experience with machine learning pipelines such as Amazon SageMaker or Azure ML.
An obsession in solving customer problems in revenue management using big data and technology.
About Duetto:

We are a team of passionate hospitality and technology professionals delivering a modern platform to hoteliers in over 60 countries. Our solutions address the biggest problems faced by the hospitality industry by simplifying distribution complexity and optimizing profitability with unique and powerful applications that increase conversion, guest loyalty, operational efficiency and revenue. Our goal is to become the most trusted, effective and widely used hotel technology company in the world. Founded in 2012, Duetto is headquartered in San Francisco with offices in Las Vegas, London, Singapore and Buenos Aires. Duetto is backed by leading investors: Warburg Pincus, Accel Partners, Icon Ventures, and Battery Ventures. If you want to be a part of a fast-growing company, working with amazing people tackling big challenges in a massive industry, then Duetto is looking for you.,Company DescriptionUserTesting enables every organization to deliver the best customer experience powered by human insight. With UserTesting's on-demand Human Insight Platform, companies across industries make accurate customer-first decisions at every level, at the speed business demands. With UserTesting, product teams, marketers, digital and customer experience executives confidently and quickly create the right experiences for all target audiences, increasing brand loyalty and revenue. UserTesting has over 1,200 subscription customers, including 48 of the top 100 brands in the world, and has delivered human insights to over 35,000 companies to-date.Founded in 2007 and backed by Accel and OpenView, UserTesting is headquartered in San Francisco with offices in Atlanta and Edinburgh. To learn more, visit www.usertesting.com.Job DescriptionWe're looking for a curious, data-driven and passionate analyst who is eager to unlock and communicate the story behind marketing data. Insights from data power decisions at UserTesting. Must be a self-starter and fast learner who will partner with our marketing managers, helping to drive exponential growth in our customer acquisition, retention, and growth programs.In working with our marketing teams (such as ABM & demand generation, events, brand, integrated and customer marketing) and stakeholders from sales operations, business intelligence, and data science, you will be detail-oriented and laser-focused on data quality, integrity, and reporting. Your ability to translate broad concepts into detailed project requirements will drive efficiency in delivering the solutions the team needs to achieve our aggressive goals.In this critical role, you will help identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in data sets of varying size and complexity to determine the target audience for marketing campaigns. Establish campaign testing methodology, track and analyze results and key metrics from direct and digital marketing campaigns, and prepare all post-campaign analytics and performance reporting.Through your analysis, you'll help us create and optimize the marketing dashboards for on-demand visibility of outcomes, identify the customer journey trends that will inform campaign design and adjustments, and enable a culture of test and learn throughout the team.Responsibilities:* Help drive the definition, measurement, and tracking of the key marketing, demand gen metrics and KPIs with key stakeholders in the marketing department* Be the data steward and enforce data hygiene standards* Provide insights that will help guide our attribution methodology and enhance our understanding of customer lifetime value* Regular analysis of campaign data to identify patterns that lead to higher conversion rates, increased deal size, and shorter time to close* Manage, govern, report and optimize the database for segmentation* Work closely with marketers to understand marketing data requirements regarding how data enters, is standardized and processed, and how it moves through our systems* Create the measurement plan for data management, including database health metrics, contact acquisition strategy, and data governance and operational process while ensuring database readiness to support marketing programs* Collect and organize the information required to run campaigns from the backend/reporting KPIs view ensuring quality data, attribution, lifecycle and conversion ratesSkills & Required Experience:* 5 - 7 years of hands-on experience in data management for B2B marketing, marketing & demand generation teams* Experience working with other tools like RedShift, Periscope, Salesforce.com, Marketo, Google Analytics, Heap, Optimizely, Gainsight and Influitive* Experience working with business owners in defining reporting and data requirements* Proven abilities to mine data, identify errors and bubble up insights that are actionable* Thorough understanding of campaign & funnel analysis, different type of multi-touch attribution models and pipeline contribution* Strong experience with applied SQL / data querying languages, BI/visualization tools (e.g. Tableau, Periscope), and Excel, R, Python, or other analysis tools* Experience with predictive modeling is a plus* Experience with interpreting & communicating data-driven insights* Excellent communication skills and transparency at all levels* Cross-culturally aware and sensitive to working with global teams* A great team player - collaborative, detail-oriented and organized, comfortable working in a cross-functional and matrixed environmentAdditional InformationBesides a great work environment and the opportunity to change the world, we offer competitive salary, benefits, plenty of perks, as well as stock options. We value diversity, and are proud to be an inclusive, equal opportunity workplace.Learn more about what it is like to work at UserTesting at: https://www.usertesting.com/about-us/job,We're looking for a Clinical Data Analyst to help us accomplish our mission to improve lives by learning from the experience of every cancer patient. Here's what you need to know about the role, our team and why Flatiron Health is the right next step in your career.

What You'll Do

In this role, you'll work with the Clinical Data team to interpret and organize clinical oncology data. Reporting to the Manager, Clinical Data, you'll be responsible for assisting with the development of data capture forms and feasibility tests, and working alongside cross-functional team members on ways to improve data models. In addition, you'll also:
Support the management of a portfolio of 2-5 projects
Assist with the development of data capture forms, data capture instructions and data analyses
Support data quality and control activities, including clarifying clinical guidance, correcting errors and refining instructions
Participate in problem-solving discussions with internal stakeholders (e.g. Research Clinicians, Product, Quantitative Sciences, Engineering and Life Science Partnerships) to determine clinically and scientifically sound approaches
Begin to work to understand how to identify major pain points in various workflows by contributing to the development of templates and tools to address these challenges
Surface suggestions regarding how to improve our software platform(s) to our software engineers
This is a great opportunity for you to work with cross functional teams (e.g, Research Clinicians, Product, Operations, Quantitative Sciences and Engineering) on research initiatives to develop high quality data products for delivery to clients.

Who You Are

You have 2+ years of experience working in clinical research and with data management/analysis. You're excited by the prospect of rolling up your sleeves to tackle meaningful problems each and every day. You're a kind, passionate and collaborative problem-solver who seeks and gives candid feedback, and values the chance to make an important impact.
You have BS or MS in science, nursing, or healthcare related field
You have at least 2 year of relevant experience as a clinical research assistant, registered nurse, physician assistant, or equivalent with considerable healthcare experience
You have experience with clinical data management or data entry
You have a high comfort level with technology and familiarity with EMR systems and EDCs
You demonstrate exceptional attention to detail
You have strong verbal and written communication skills
You are a self-motivator who is able to prioritize and address problems in a highly dynamic and fast-paced environment
You are willing to travel to our NYC office once per month during your training period and once per quarter thereafter
If this sounds like you, you'll fit right in at Flatiron.

Extra Credit
You are familiar with SQL
You are familiar with all aspects of how cancer is treated, from diagnosis to recovery, and are fluent in cancer terminology
Why You Should Join Our Team

A career at Flatiron is a chance to work with everyone involved in the future of cancer care and research—all under one roof. Researchers, data scientists, designers, clinicians, technologists and many more all work together to improve cancer care and accelerate research.

You'll also find a culture of continuous learning, broad and inclusive employee support offerings, and a commitment to supporting our team members in all aspects of their lives—at home, at work and everywhere in between. We offer:
Flatiron University training curriculum which includes presentation skills, meeting mastery, coding languages and more
Career coaching opportunities
Hackathons for all employees (not just our engineers!)
Professional development benefit for attending conferences, industry events and external courses
Work/life autonomy via flexible work hours and flexible paid time off
Generous parental leave (16 weeks for either parent)
Back-up child care
Flatiron-sponsored fitness classes
Flatiron Health is proud to be an Equal Employment Opportunity employer.

We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, gender (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics.,As a Business Data Analyst, you will build our business analytics vertical and drive insights that lead to step-function operational improvements. In this role, you will partner with leadership and teams from across the business—from sales to finance—to help unpack ambiguous problems and build lasting, scalable analytics solutions. Your work will vary from one-off investigations to building core dashboards and tables, and it will directly evolve how Scale operates and measures itself. We are looking for candidates who are incessantly curious and who love creating insights out of ambiguity.
You will:
Collaborate with leadership, finance, marketing, and sales teams to identify, define, and track key metrics to be used in monitoring, planning, and one-off decision-making
Work closely with other teams to investigate problems, uncover root causes, and drive quantitative solutions
Measure and effectively communicate results to the entire organization
Help operators across the business better understand our customers, taskers, and pipeline efficiency
Develop repeatable, scalable analytical solutions, such as dashboards, models, or better underlying tables
Ideally you'd have:
2+ years of relevant work experience in a role requiring application of data and analytics to business problems
Mastery of SQL and relational databases; experience with scripting languages (e.g., Python/R),
Experience with BI tools (e.g., Tableau), and Excel preferred
Experience designing and building dashboards (Tableau) - understanding which metrics are most meaningful to the business and the cadence required to measure them
Excellent communication and data visualization skills, and the ability to convey complex ideas succinctly
Ability to initiate and drive projects to completion with minimal guidance
Nice to haves:
Experience with finance and US GAAP accounting principles
Familiarity with Salesforce
About Us:
At Scale, our mission is to accelerate the development of Machine Learning and AI applications across multiple markets. Our first product is a suite of APIs that allow AI teams to generate high-quality ground truth data. Our customers include OpenAI, Zoox, Lyft, Pinterest, Airbnb, nuTonomy, and many more.

Scale AI is an equal opportunity employer. We aim for every person at Scale to feel like they matter, belong, and can be their authentic selves so they can do their best work. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.

Scale AI is committed to working with and providing reasonable accommodations to applicants with physical and mental disabilities. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation in the application or recruiting process due to a disability, please contact us at accommodations@scale.com. Please see the United States Department of Labor's EEO poster and EEO poster supplement for additional information.,Job Description
• 3+ years of data science experience with common data science toolkits and data visualization tools • Good scripting/programming skill and applied statistics skills, such as distributions, statistical testing, regression, etc. preferred • Expert in Microsoft programs including, but not limited to, MSWord, PowerPoint, Visio, Access, and Excel
•Knowledge of Oracle, Access, Tableau, SQL, Excel is a Must
Company Description
Netpace is a data-driven provider of AI, Block Chain, Analytics and Cloud Enablement solutions to Fortune 500 companies. and support our Pharma Clients with various positions starting from IT to Clinical Phase I-III/Post Marketing. Our data-centric services and solutions are used to drive digital transformations and empower our customers to make highly informed business decisions.
Our client is a research-based biopharmaceutical company that discovers, develops and commercializes innovative medicines in areas of unmet medical need. With each new discovery and investigational drug candidate, we seek to improve the care of patients living with life-threatening diseases around the world. Client therapeutic areas of focus include HIV/AIDS, liver diseases, cancer and inflammation, and serious respiratory and cardiovascular conditions..,Snowflake started with a clear vision: develop a cloud data platform that is effective, affordable, and accessible to all data users. Snowflake developed an innovative new product with a built-for-the-cloud architecture that combines the power of data warehousing, the flexibility of big data platforms, and the elasticity of the cloud at a fraction of the cost of traditional solutions. We are now a global, world-class organization with offices in more than a dozen countries and serving many more.

As a HR Data Analyst in our Human Resources organization, you will have the unique opportunity to influence the internal Snowflake roadmap related to business & people analytics. Your work will support quarterly organizational metric reviews & uncover data insights that will help drive important strategic decisions to grow and scale the company. You will join a growing team and get to work with some of the leading data scientists and engineers in the field of cloud data warehousing.
You will play a crucial role in collecting, structuring, analyzing, and reporting on HR processes and data. You will bring your technical expertise to ensure the quality and accuracy of that data, then process, design and present it in ways to help people, businesses, and organizations make better decisions. You will be a subject matter expert to identify best in class reporting metrics, collaborating with the business based on their needs and determining the best approach to fulfill request(s). The HR Data Analyst is responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the information that is provided. You will quickly identify business risks, inefficiencies, issues and opportunities related to our daily processes and solves these issues with an emphasis on automation of the end product.
RESPONSIBILITIES
Partner with HR Business Partners, Compensation, Talent Acquisition and Recruiting teams to understand their business challenges & present data driven solutions
Support the HR leadership team in building metrics and insights roadmap
Storytelling - Translate data and analysis into a story to help drive decisions across the organization
Create quarterly reports for a wide variety of stakeholders; Calculate retention, turnover, diversity and internal mobility rates
Responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the information that is being provided by carefully and continually scrutinizing the data to ensure the right information is portrayed in the reports being delivered
Proactively suggest information that should be analyzed based on key indicators and identify trends that would require further analysis to determine root cause and/or pinpoint specific areas of concern
Work diligently to instill confidence in the business to trust the information that is being represented in the insights provided
Responsible for keeping current on industry trends of HR analytics and predictive analysis
Responsible for ensuring that they respect and observe applicable data privacy guidelines when handling sensitive data
Design & develop insightful HR & Executive dashboards reporting on key recruiting metrics such as time to fill and hiring costs
Build Executive & HR dashboards using visualization tools (Tableau/Looker)
Translate business needs into technical requirements for Snowflake Admins
IDEAL CANDIDATE
Experience with HR data analysis & strong HR business acumen (Knowledge of HR Practices, processes & standard metrics) is required
Must have advanced working experience with data visualization applications (Looker/Tableau)
Great communications skills - you must be able to present your findings to executives and business stakeholders - Must understand the art of storytelling - go beyond the data to insights
Advanced Microsoft Excel and experience with analyzing complex data sets
Knowledge and familiarity with Workday reporting or Greenhouse is desirable
Ability to execute well in a fast-paced, rapidly evolving organization
Snowflake is growing fast, and we're scaling our team to help enable and accelerate our growth. We are looking for people who share our values, challenge ordinary thinking, and push the pace of innovation while building a future for themselves and Snowflake.
How do you want to make your impact?

Snowflake is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, color, gender identity or expression, marital status, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, race, religion, pregnancy, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.,Computer System Validation Engineer
We are looking for a Labware LIMS CSV engineer with GMP experience in creation, review and approval of CSV deliverables for laboratory informatics implementation projects.

Responsibilities
Develop Validation Plans and Change Controls for Labware LIMS (Laboratory Information Management System)
Develop Validation testing strategy in accordance with Gilead's policy and procedures
Working closely with System Manager, Quality Assurance and Business Process Owners to effectively and efficiently implement LIMS projects
Assist with understanding the business requirements, analyze and suggest technical solution for LIMS projects
Work closely with other validation team members to ensure system impact is assessed and mitigation strategy is in place for multiple sites using LIMS application
Create, review & approve CSV deliverables such as, User/Functional Specification, Design specification, IQ/OQ/PQ qualifications for LIMS projects
Qualification protocols execution and final report view and approval for LIMS projects
Partner closely with the business to ensure that CSV methodologies are well understood and applied in a manner that will procedure the most value on LIMS projects
Learn and become proficient the EDMS (Electronic Data Management System), for
document review and approval and ELMS (Electronic Leaning Management System) for documenting and performing assigned training.
Prepare, revise and obtain approval of the following documents for GMP laboratories related to the LIS systems:
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
Work Instructions (WIs)
Forms
User Manuals / User Guides / User References / Quick Reference Guides and Training Material
Training Plans
Reference Documents
Specifications
Reports
Work independently but recognize the need to consult stake holders and keep them informed of progress.
Required Experience / Skills:
Minimum of 3-5 years of experience working on a Labware LIMS application and GMP pharmaceutical / biotechnology / medical device environment. Laboratory experience as a chemist or microbiologist, et al is preferred.
Advanced knowledge and expertise Computer System Validation, FDA& international requirements and Part 11requirements.
Ability to master technical content through interaction with subject matter experts.
Effective communication and interpersonal skills.
Computer Systems Validation (CSV) experience writing validation deliverables per GAMP guidelines is required.
Understanding of programming and relational database concepts is required.
Required Education:
BA/BS degree related to technical writing; e.g. biology, chemistry, computer science and/or technology disciplines is preferred.,Job Description
Indianapolis based, Upper Hand, sports and fitness software leader, is looking for a Data Analyst, Predictive Modeling. The Data Analyst utilizes their skills to ask questions, turn data into knowledge, form conclusions, and make recommendations that enable Scripps to innovate, differentiate itself from its competitors, work smarter, make better decisions, and enhance profitability. This individual will partner with be a change agent reporting to the CEO directly to help in- identifying questions that are important to our business & clients, and then using statistical analysis and data mining techniques to inform the answers, recommendations and next steps and communicate both visually and in writing. This position will be in Indianapolis, IN.

Key Activities:

Support sales pitch with analysis and data driven collateral that is compelling to the client
Guide client’s decisions using historical results and future projections as a trusted advisor to business leaders and users, using data and analytics as a basis for better, more informed decision making
Identify impactful choices or courses of action that drive value for the organization and clients
Influence the direction of future product innovation by effectively communicating conclusions to cross-functional groups
Mine large amounts of data and perform data analysis to extract useful business insights for a wide range of topics including product development and performance, market dynamics, consumer and audience knowledge, internal operations, and external research
Initial study design, acquisition of data, prototyping and production roll out
Support the design and implement of reporting dashboards that track key business metrics and provide actionable insights
Secure final, accurate data files from enterprise customers
Use software and other tools to develop analyses that identify patterns, influences, correlations, relationships, predictive factors, risk factors, and that provide better situational awareness
Creation of models, simulations, and optimization routines
Develop of data flows and acquisition strategies to facilitate the capture and sharing of data and analytics within the organization
Support the development of analytics products and services by providing input into product roadmaps
Tools/Methods
R, RapidMiner, MySQL, Excel, and other tools for data mining using techniques like agent-based modeling, anomaly detection, A/B testing, nearest neighbor, cluster analysis, sentiment analysis, decision trees, optimization, simulation, and regression analysis, ANT modeling, flock modeling

In this role, you will:

Iteratively and quickly develop predictive models
Use analytics to build cohorts in order to identify opportunities in high value segments
Understand subject matter KPIs, trends and cohorts in order to improve upon existing methodologies
Collaborate with software engineers and business owners to define product requirements and model parameters
Work with engineering teams to automate and scale predictive model solutions
Develop and maintain a testing framework for monitoring short and long term results of predictive models
Deliver presentations to senior leadership to explain and illustrate complex analytical findings
Qualifications & Experience:
4+ years experience in a hands-on analytical role with a focus on analyzing business problems
Deep understanding of web analytics
Experience prototyping models in excel
Strong analytical, conceptual, and problem-solving abilities
High level of comfort with large relational data sets, database mining and manipulation
Experience in tools used for data analysis and reporting (R Studio, SQL, Excel)
Clear written and oral communication skills
Understanding of machine learning techniques and algorithms.
About Upper Hand:
Headquartered in Indianapolis, IN, Upper Hand, Inc. is a technology company that delivers innovation through technology and design to drive world class customer experience for sports and fitness businesses. Our innovative software platform and unbeatable customer service help businesses scale to compete in a competitive market, offering simplified front-end office tasks and cutting-edge marketing tools that aim to personalize, simplify and maximize the customer journey. To learn more about Upper Hand, visit www.getupperhand.com,Summary of Duties:
Responsible for installation and implementation of the Subex ROC® Revenue Assurance program with telecommunications customers.
Responsible for troubleshooting issues related to Hadoop environment setup and integration with Subex ROC® Revenue Assurance product.
Support the creation of key performance indicators and controls across various areas to ensure the Revenue Assurance program operates as designed, ensuring accuracy of revenue streams and identification and elimination of revenue leakage events.
Provide testing and troubleshooting on software issues and malfunctions.
Serve as technical support on the Revenue Assurance product.
Perform regular analysis and review of the installed Revenue Assurance product to ensure it operates as functioned.
Additional experience to include: work experience in areas of Hadoop Platform, Subscription Assurance, Usage integrity, Billing and Settlement, Roaming; work experience with trouble shooting Hadoop environment, Cluster configuration and setup related issues, script developments in Oracle, SQL Server, UNIX and Microsoft Jscript; development and maintenance; work experience with enterprise database, reporting, and server software; and work experience with core business processes, controls, standards, and systems in the telecommunications industry. Having reporting and analysis, preferably with Qlikview or Tableau.

Education: Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, or a related field

Benefits: Our employees are offered many fantastic benefits such as medical, vision, dental insurance, and flex spending accounts. We also provide life, short, and long-term disability insurance at no cost to employees. The 401k program is matched at $0.50 on the dollar up to 6% and it is 100% vested immediately.

Vacation is accrued per pay period for a total of 3 weeks per year and employees also receive 16 hours personal time and 40 hours sick time per year (pro-rated if joining mid-year). We also allow for vacation balance borrowing for those who have things scheduled shortly after joining.

About Us: Subex is a pioneer in enabling Digital Trust for businesses across the globe. Founded in 1992, Subex has spent over 25 years in helping global Communications Service Providers maximize their revenues and profitability. With a legacy of having served the market through its world-class solutions for business optimization and analytics, Subex is now leading the way by enabling all-round Digital Trust in the business ecosystems of its customers. Focusing on privacy, security, risk mitigation, predictability and data integrity, Subex helps businesses embrace the disruptive changes in the business landscape and succeed with Digital Trust.

Job Type: Full-time

Benefits:
401(k)
Dental Insurance
Disability Insurance
Flexible Spending Account
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Paid Time Off
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Experience:
SQL: 1 year (Required)
Education:
Bachelor's (Required)
Location:
Bellevue, WA 98006 (Required),Gloo provides a personal growth platform that enables service providers, our “Champions,” to exchange better insights, resources, and technology to serve their people. Our company name reflects the trusted bond between people that serves as the foundation for growth, and everything we build strengthens that bond. We’re leveraging the same exponential tech that’s driving success in other industries and making it available through personal growth resources such as custom assessments, growth plans, and more. As one of Boulder’s most innovative and growing tech companies, Gloo needs more talented professionals who are driven to make a positive impact.

As the newest member of our revenue operations team, you will be analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data to help us make strategic business decisions. You are a data analyst with a slant towards engineering - some might describe you as a data superhero, and that’s what we want. You have in-depth experience with data visualization and a communication style that gives you the ability to deliver your message clearly and concisely to stakeholders. If you’ve been working in a SaaS or mobile app company with your hands on marketing analytics and are ready to take on a new challenge, let’s talk!
What You'll Be Doing:
Utilizing Salesforce, Google Analytics and Hotjar to collect essential data related to the success of the business
Converting raw data and complex quantitative analysis into actionable business goals
Helping direct insights that will improve efficiencies and identifying opportunities for product optimization
Reviewing and analyzing user session videos to identify patterns and correlate with analytics
Championing our data-driven, user centered design process; evangelizing metrics and outcomes
Collaborating with Marketing, Product, Sales, Support, Systems, Data Science, and Engineering to coordinate solutions and bring ideas to life

What We're Looking For:

BS in Data Science, Information Management, Computer Science, or a related discipline
At least 4 years of experience analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data in the market intelligence, MarTech or mobile/web platform space
Proficiency with analysis and query languages – SQL, R, Python
Experience with data visualization and BI tools like Tableau and Domo
Ability to identify opportunities for product optimization by tracking user behavior using Google Analytics, Hotjar, and Google Tag Manager
Creative, articulate, and competent communication style – you deliver your message clearly, concisely, and confidently every time
Intellectual curiosity – you are always looking for new ways to extract, analyze and use data to further our mission
The Perks/Benefits
Compensation and bonus commensurate with experience
Plenty of time off to help you stay balanced
Medical with HSA contribution
A dynamic, talented team, dedicated to changing the world and building an incredible business
Beautiful office space in downtown Boulder on Pearl Street, steps from coffee shops and blocks from hiking trails
Company Happy Hour Fridays
Fresh fruit, snacks, coffee and sodas
Applications welcomed from those who are US Citizens or hold a Green Card.,Description:

PROLIM Global
Corporation (www.prolim.com) is currently seeking Data Analyst in Denver, CO with one of
our top client

Description/Comment:

Perform physical and/or logical data modeling
and analysis. Will develop dashboards to track key business metrics, including
sales results, branch/FC partnership, rep activities, trading results, online
page visits, etc. Required to have strong statistics and data analysis
background. Ability to work in a fast-paced, technical, cross-functional
environment and be able to produce with minimal direction. Excellent written
and verbal communication skills. Experience with Tableau.

Apply
online for immediate consideration, please send your updated resume and contact
info via email rohit.sheelvant@prolim.com or Contact (214) 919-4138.

About PROLIM Corporation

PROLIM
is a global company focused on product innovation by leveraging IT and PLM
Technologies. PROLIM has more than a decade of PLM Service history – serving
Automotive, Aerospace, High Tech and Industrial Machinery companies throughout
the world.

Our
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) practice is powered by a team of consultants
who provide comprehensive end-to-end service offerings. We have a PLM
Center-of-Excellence (CoE) that enables our customers to build innovative
solutions to the most-pressing PLM challenges. The CoE is supported by the
right skills, resources, technologies and methodologies and helps develop
customized solutions to better manage the entire product lifecycle.,Associate BA, Data Provisioning


Job Location: Denver, CO.

Reports to: Data Provisioning Manager

Position Overview:

The Associate Business Analyst will coordinate all data provisioning activities for Recondo Technology’s suite of revenue cycle management products.

We are interested in speaking with you if you can leverage exceptional collaboration, team-building, problem-solving, and analytical skills to drive customer success.

What You Will Do
The position is responsible for receipt and organization of data processing requests, processing them to completion for Recondo customers and Recondo internal staff.
Work extensively with client services and operations teams to facilitate accurate rate calculation and customer satisfaction.
Requests will range from highly complex data processing for new builds to relatively simple data maintenance.
Respond to high priority incidences.
What We Seek:
A customer-focused individual who can collaborate with internal and external stakeholders to drive high impact work.
The position requires strong computer literacy with an emphasis on Excel analysis and modification.
Familiarity with payer network participation contract terms and conditions is preferred.
Someone who has the“right stuff”. This means a commitment for growth and understanding that individual performance impacts our business.
An individual who can look at the whole picture and provide a total solution.
Strong analytical and communication skills are required.
This position requires a high degree of attention to detail and the ability to work under deadlines.
Preferences
At least 1 year of healthcare experience in claims, billing, coding or administration preferred.
Any familiarity with photo editing tools such as Photoshop or open source tools like .


Travel Requirements
No travel will be required
Compensation and Benefits

Recondo offers competitive compensation and a dynamic, growing company environment. Benefits include stock options, comprehensive coverage for medical, dental, life, disability, 401(k) savings plan, and vacations and holidays.

No agencies or phone calls, please. EOE

Recondo Technology provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, marital status, amnesty, or status as a covered veteran in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws.,We work to solve deep technical problems that improve the world of Healthcare. These problems span a variety of core topics in computer science ranging from databases to distributed systems. We are looking for a Senior Data Analyst to work alongside our Business Intelligence Product Development team to produce insights that will help shape product and development strategies.

The Sr Data Analyst will scope and execute analyses to formulate conclusions and recommendations to be presented to Business Partners on related opportunities. This role will collaborate closely with Product and Engineering teams to design reporting, verify data quality and accuracy along with application and report data accuracy.

Key Responsibilities
Leads analysis effort for our Business Intelligence Product Development Team.
Generate reports and reporting/analytics standards for both internal and customer facing solutions from analysis results using Looker or similar.
Identify patterns and trends in collected data sets.
Work alongside engineering and product teams to identify and establish data and analytics solutions to support business needs.
Define new data collection and analysis processes.
Provide quality assurance for data processes.
Support the development and product teams in identifying and revising reporting requirements.
Support initiatives for data integrity and normalization.
KEY DUTIES
Collect, interpret and analyze data from disparate sources including Oracle, Redshift, Sql Server, Mongo, Elastic Search.
Analyze business requirements and work with teammates to formulate supporting design and design documentation.
Other duties as assigned.
KEY COMPETENCIES
Thorough understanding of, and support for, Agile development methodologies
Ability to think strategically
Ability to adapt to changing conditions and lead others through change
An analytical mind and inclination for problem-solving
Demonstrated analytical, organizational, prioritization, and time management skills
Ability and willingness to travel nationally to remote offices and partners approximately 10% of the time
Required Education, Certifications, and Experience
Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science, Mathematics, or Statistics
8+ years’ experience mining data as a data analyst in a related field
Proven analytic skills, including mining, evaluation, analysis, and visualization
Technical writing experience in relevant areas, including queries, reports, and presentations
Strong demonstrable SQL skills
8+ years’ experience handling large data sets and relational databases.
High-level written and verbal communication skills.
Ability to analyze large datasets
Ability to write comprehensive reports
Strong verbal and written communication skills
An analytical mind and inclination for problem-solving
Attention to detail
Preferred Qualifications
Experience in a diverse set of AWS data services including:
EC2
S3
Athena
Redshift
Aurora MySQL
RDS
Development Experience with Python, PySpark, or R
Key Differentiators
Looker Visualization Experience
Machine Learning Experience
GHX: It’s the way you do business in healthcare


Global Healthcare Exchange (GHX) enables better patient care and billions in savings for the healthcare community by maximizing automation, efficiency and accuracy of business processes.

GHX is a healthcare business and data automation company, empowering healthcare organizations to enable better patient care and maximize industry savings using our world class cloud-based supply chain technology exchange platform, solutions, analytics and services. We bring together healthcare providers and manufacturers and distributors in North America and Europe— who rely on smart, secure healthcare-focused technology and comprehensive data to automate their business processes and make more informed decisions.

It is our passion and vision for a more operationally efficient healthcare supply chain, helping organizations reduce– not shift– the cost of doing business, paving the way to delivering patient care more effectively. Together we take more than a billion dollars out of the cost of delivering healthcare every year. GHX is privately owned, operates in the United States, Canada and Europe, and employs more than 600 people worldwide. Our corporate headquarters is in Europe, Louisville, Colorado, just outside of Denver, with additional offices in Europe, Atlanta, Georgia and Omaha, Nebraska.

Disclaimer:


GHX provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, marital status, amnesty, or status as a covered veteran in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. GHX complies with applicable state and local laws governing non-discrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including, but not limited to, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation, and training.

GHX expressly prohibits any form of unlawful employee harassment based on race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, or veteran status. Improper interference with the ability of GHX’s employees to perform their expected job duties is absolutely not tolerated.,Summary

Responsible for working cross-functionally to collect data and develop

models to determine customer experience drivers utilizing a variety of data sources and techniques. Utilizes all phases of the analytics lifecycle to derive actionable insights from the end to end customer journey, with strength in question design, results interpretation, and statistical and analytical methods. Has in-depth knowledge in one or more business domains related to the customer experience. Usually determines own work priorities and has a passion for transforming the customer experience into our best product. Acts as resource for colleagues with less experience.

Employees at all levels are expected to:

- Understand our Operating Principles; make them the guidelines for how you do your job

- Own the customer experience - think and act in ways that put our customers first, give them seamless digital options at every touchpoint, and make them promoters of our products and services

- Know your stuff - be enthusiastic learners, users and advocates of our game-changing technology, products and services, especially our digital tools and experiences

- Win as a team - make big things happen by working together and being open to new ideas

- Be an active part of the Net Promoter System - a way of working that brings more employee and customer feedback into the company - by joining huddles, making call backs and helping us elevate opportunities to do better for our customers

- Drive results and growth

- Respect and promote inclusion and diversity

- Do what's right for each other, our customers, investors and our communities

Primary Responsibilities:

- Identify systemic drivers of end to end customer experience utilizing analytic techniques

- Assess impact of drivers and prioritize initiatives

- Track success of initiatives

- Effectively communicate drivers and priorities to business to drive change

Core Responsibilities:

- Collaborates with both the analytic organization and its technology partners to define and publish complex data products.

- Provides training to and acts as technical resource for team members.

- Acts as a subject matter expert in one or more data subject areas such as sales, call center, network operation, and financial data.

- Serves as a team leader within a work group or on cross-functional teams; accepts team lead stretch assignments. Presents results, recommendations, and business insights to broader senior leadership team.

- Produces a variety of reports, graphs, summaries and presentations that convey analytic results and align with business needs.

- Performs basic research on root cause of data anomalies that are uncovered through normal course of analysis.

- Writes complex SQL to query large data platforms such as Teradata, SQL server, Oracle and Hadoop to obtain data necessary for analysis. Combines data as needed from disparate data sources to complete analysis.

- Participates in defining business intelligence requirements for projects and data requests.

- Participates in multiple enterprise wide projects by providing data analysis to project leaders.

- Follows best practices and established policies in business intelligence data analysis, maintenance, and data quality.

- Creates technical documentation (internal).

- Consistent exercise of independent judgment and discretion in matters of significance.

- Regular, consistent and punctual attendance. Must be able to work nights and weekends, variable schedule(s) as necessary.

- Other duties and responsibilities as assigned.

Education Level:

- Bachelor’s Degree

Field of Study:

- Business, Business Intelligence, Information Systems, or related field

Years of Experience:

- Generally, requires 5-8 years related experience.

Additional Requirements:

- Confident with machine learning concepts and how to apply them for analytics; intermediate to advanced Python and/or R skills

- Data wrangling skills to extract and cleanse data for analyses

- Strong skills in data interpretation for insight

- Strong skills in SQL and preferred experience with Hadoop/Hive

- Strong data visualization and storytelling skills

- Confident with foundational statistical concepts and their application in business