Overview

Provides analytical and technical support for the integration of multiple data sources used to prepare internal and external reporting for the Quality Management team and business stakeholders. Provides support and analytical insight for Quality Incentive measures, HEDIS measures, and Quality Improvement initiatives. Monitors, analyzes, and communicates Quality performance related to benchmarks. Collaborates with clinical and operational teams within Quality Management, as well as with CHOICE Clinical Operations and Business Intelligence & Analytics (BIA). Participates in data validation of current reporting and dashboards. Monitors data integrity of databases and provides recommendation accordingly. Participates in the development of internal dashboards and databases. Works under general direction.

Responsibilities
Provides support and analytical insight for Quality Incentive measures, HEDIS measures, and Quality Improvement initiatives.
Monitors internal performance against benchmarks through analysis.
Participates in the identification, development, management, and monitoring of quality improvement initiatives.
Collaborates with Education staff and makes recommendations for areas of focus in training of assessors and care managers, based on analysis of performance trends.
Researches and identifies technical/operational problems surrounding systems/applications; communicates/refers complex and unresolved problems to management, Business Intelligence & Analytics (BIA), and/or IT.
Conducts ad hoc analyses to help identify operational gaps in care; drafts presentations, reports, publications, etc. regarding results of analyses.
Communicates results of data analysis to non-technical audiences.
Participates in prioritization of departmental goals based on identification of operational gaps in care.
Participates in establishing data quality specifications and designs. Coordinates and supports integrated data systems for analyzing and validating information.
Identifies and makes recommendations for reporting re-designs and platforms for reporting (e.g. automating a manual Excel file using macros, developing a MicroStrategy dashboard to replace manually updated Excel dashboards, moving data storage from Excel to Access, etc.), as needed. Trains staff on use of new/updated systems and related topics.
Assists Quality management team with database and department reports. Conducts operations review and analysis of processes and procedures, issues report of findings and implements approved changes as required.
Identifies and recommends software needs and applications to accomplish required reporting.
Retrieves, compiles, reviews and ensures accuracy of data from databases; researches and corrects discrepancies, as needed. Analyzes data from internal and external sources. Identifies and resolves data quality issues before reports are generated. Works with staff to correct data entry errors.
Analyzes data, identifies trends, reoccurring problems, statistically significant findings and prepares reports/summaries for management review.
Acts as a liaison between Quality Management, CHOICE Clinical Operations, and BIA.
Reviews and identifies trends and variances in data and reports. Researches findings and determines appropriateness of elevating identified issues to leadership for further review/evaluation/action.
Monitors and maintains files by ensuring that files are current and of relevant nature.
Analyzes and corrects error reports to ensure timely and accurate data; develops corrective actions to prevent errors where possible.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties, as needed.
Qualifications
Education: Bachelors degree in bio/statistics, epidemiology, mathematics, computer science, social sciences, a related field or the equivalent work experience required. Masters degree with concentration in computer science, data science, or statistics preferred.


Experience: Minimum of two years experience performing increasingly complex data analysis and interpretation, preferably in a managed care or health care setting, required. Experience with data extraction and manipulation required. Experience with relational databases and programming experience in SQL or PL/SQL required. Experience with claims data and health plan quality metrics (e.g., HEDIS, QARR) preferred. Proficiency conducting statistical analysis with R, SAS, Stata or other statistical software preferred. Advanced personal computer skills, including Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, Excel, and Access required. Effective oral, written communication and interpersonal skills required. Ability to multi task in a fast-paced environment required.

CA2020,NYU Grossman School of Medicine is one of the nation’s top-ranked medical schools. For 175 years, NYU Grossman School of Medicine has trained thousands of physicians and scientists who have helped to shape the course of medical history and enrich the lives of countless people. An integral part of NYU Langone Health, the Grossman School of Medicine at its core is committed to improving the human condition through medical education, scientific research, and direct patient care. For more information, go to med.nyu.edu, and interact with us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Position Summary:

We have an exciting opportunity to join our team as a Data Analyst.

The Data Analyst will work directly with Dr. Horwitz, the Director of the Division of Healthcare Delivery Science and the Center for Healthcare Innovations and Delivery Science, as well as the Rapid RCT Lab. We are seeking a qualified Data Analyst to provide support for data management and analyses across the Rapid RCT portfolio of projects. The Data Analyst will be responsible for planning, designing, and implementing statistical analyses. A successful applicant will be able to work autonomously and comfortably in an academic medical center environment.

Job Responsibilities:
Maintain existing data collection and analysis systems in support of the research protocol
Under direct supervision by the Division Director and with the guidance of the team’s lead biostatistician, conduct basic statistical analyses and present them to the team
Support the development of publications and conference presentations, including drafting academic and nonacademic publications, writing conference abstracts, conducting lit reviews and creating tables and other data visualizations for presentations
Work with staff and others to facilitate automation of standard, recurrent data acquisition, management, analysis and reporting
Design and conduct analyses pertaining to data acquired thorough various data sources
Create descriptive data summaries including visualizations and written descriptions of data findings for a wide range of audiences
Provide technical assistance to analysts and researchers in accessing and analyzing datasets, as needed
Minimum Qualifications:
To qualify you must have a Masters degree in health care economics, health care policy, applied statistics, data science, biostatistics or a Bachelors degree with relevant work experience
Strong quantitative skills and advanced programming skills in Stata, SAS, and/or R
At least 2 years of work experience and/or research experience in a relevant setting
Ability to select and apply appropriate statistical methods for collecting and summarizing varied data
Excellent organization, time management, and communication skills and the ability to work both independently and as part of a collaborative research team
Preferred Qualifications:
Knowledge of principles and methods of biostatistics; principles, theories, and procedures of epidemiology, including study design, statistical analysis, and causal inference
Appropriate computer processing methods used to generate, organize and display statistical and research data; and standard English grammar, spelling, and usage
Strong attention to detail
Problem-solving and critical thinking skills
Planning/organizational skills
Personal motivation
Qualified candidates must be able to effectively communicate with all levels of the organization.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine provides its staff with far more than just a place to work. Rather, we are an institution you can be proud of, an institution where you’ll feel good about devoting your time and your talents.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer committed to diversity and inclusion in all aspects of recruiting and employment. All qualified individuals are encouraged to apply and will receive consideration without regard to race, color, gender, gender identity or expression, sex, sexual orientation, transgender status, gender dysphoria, national origin, age, religion, disability, military and veteran status, marital or parental status, citizenship status, genetic information or any other factor which cannot lawfully be used as a basis for an employment decision. We require applications to be completed online.

If you wish to view NYU Grossman School of Medicine’s EEO policies, please click here. Please click here to view the Federal “EEO is the law” poster or visit https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/ofccpost.htm for more information. To view the Pay Transparency Notice, please click here.,Job Summary:

The Clinical Research Data Analyst for the Pediatric BMT Program will support BMT clinical and research efforts. The Data Analyst will be responsible for the quality and integrity of data submission via Transplant Essential Data (TED) forms on all transplants and cellular therapy infusions performed by the Bone Marrow Transplant team, or post-TED forms on all transplants in accordance with CIBMTR time points at 100-day, 6-month, and annually. Responsible for answering data queries and maintaining Continuous Process Improvement (CPI) on a quarterly basis. Develop and maintain working relationships with the BMT Team in order to become familiar with the required clinical data points of the pre-TED, post-TED, and comprehensive reporting forms (CRF) from charts and electronic record for reporting and analysis. Analyze and manipulate data into forms usable for reporting to federal agencies on transplant outcomes, performance improvement initiatives, program assessment, and administrative reporting. Ensure accurate data reporting. Ensure that federal, institutional, regulatory guidelines and polices are followed and adhered to. Coordinate activities associated with the initiation and completion of clinical trials, sponsored by internal, industry, and Federal funding sources. Coordination of data management and data retrieval and analysis for Federal studies, pharmaceutical studies and investigator-initiated studies. Maintains compliance with all regulatory bodies associated with human subject research.

Additional Responsibilities:
Prepare comprehensive RFI reports to maintain our Center of Excellence status with various medical insurance companies
Performs quarterly internal audits to assess quality and accuracy of data as well
Responsible for preparation of CIBMTR audit which is conducted every four years by the CIBMTR
Effectively responds to business/clinical needs, customers, and requests
Consults, assists, and collaborates with business users, developers, and the IT group(s) at large to progress evolving departmental priorities.
Job Requirements:
Bachelor's Degree and 2-4 Years prior clinical research experience required, 5-10 years preferred; Knowledge of NCI and FDA regulations regarding clinical trials; proficiency with computers (i.e., MS Office, database, Internet); well organized and detail oriented
SOCRA or CCRC (PREFERRED) COLLABORATIVE IRB CERTIFICATION (PREFERRED, TO BE OBTAINED WITHIN FIRST MONTH OF EMPLOYMENT)
Department: Pediatrics Bargaining Unit: Non Union Campus: CHAM Employment Status: Regular Full-Time Address: 3411 Wayne Avenue, Bronx
Shift: Day Scheduled Hours: 8:30 AM-5 PM Req ID: 120541

Montefiore is an equal employment opportunity employer. Montefiore will recruit, hire, train, transfer, promote, layoff and discharge associates in all job classifications without regard to their race, color, religion, creed, national origin, alienage or citizenship status, age, gender, actual or presumed disability, history of disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic predisposition or carrier status, pregnancy, military status, marital status, or partnership status, or any other characteristic protected by law.

#GDKW; #LI-KW1; N/A,About Ro
Founded in 2017, Ro is a patient-driven telehealth company that puts you in control of your health. We’re patients, just like you, building technology to make healthcare accessible, affordable, and maybe even enjoyable. Ro powers three digital health clinics -- Roman for men’s health, Rory for women’s health, and Zero for fighting smoking addiction -- as well as Ro Pharmacy, a simple and affordable online pharmacy where every medication is $5 per month. The company’s nationwide networking of physicians and pharmacies provides a personalized, end-to-end healthcare experience from online treatment to the delivery of medication and ongoing care. Ro was named #2 in Wellness on Fast Company’s 2019 list of the World’s Most Innovative Companies, and listed by Inc. Magazine as a Best Place to Work in 2020.

As a Data Analyst, Product you will guide a product squad’s strategy and roadmap. This means everything from leading strategic analyses to inform decision-making and prioritization, to measuring product feature performance, to building out data availability and BI solutions, to brainstorming approaches to unstructured problems. You are analytical and technical, and you can communicate excellently with non-technical and technical stakeholders alike. You thrive in a startup setting, where every day is different and the problems that you’re tackling often don’t have established solutions. You are exceptionally thorough. You have a bias for action, and you love leveraging data to help our members become a healthier version of themselves.

If you think this position sounds like it could be a fit for you, please consider Ro Data’s pitch to prospective candidates.

Organizationally, this is an “embedded” Data Team position, meaning that you will be a member of the Data Team embedded within your respective product squad. For some of the nuts and bolts of how an embedded analyst works across these two groups, please see policies and philosophies for embedded analysts.
What you’ll do:
Leverage data to shape your product squad's strategy, providing support and/or leadership wherever needed.
Own projects that span disparate groups with varying levels of technical fluency from end-to-end.
Communicate not just findings, but also your recommendations to key stakeholders and leadership. You’ll use your insights to advocate for our members, physicians and pharmacists in everything we do.
Build a data-driven culture wherever you turn, from working with PMs on KPIs, to partnering with engineers on data models, to making sure that all decisions accurately utilize the most powerful data available.
Play a critical role in attacking opaque, unstructured problems; develop core analytic frameworks that shape the way the company thinks about our business.
Build out data availability and business intelligence solutions for your team.
Perform exploratory analyses and in-depth research on large data sets to uncover, size and advocate for opportunities that improve the member experience and key growth KPIs like member conversion and retention

What you’ll bring:
2+ years of full-time working experience in quantitative analysis roles
Expert-level SQL skills
Strong experience using BI tools (ours is Looker) to effectively convey information
A track record of strong communication successes, from presentations to technical documentation
Strong problem solving skills, analytical aptitude, and numerical dexterity
The ability to bring structure to initially unstructured domains
Demonstrated track record of project ownership
You care about improving the state of healthcare and have a personal connection to the space

Bonus points:
Working knowledge of Python and associated analytics libraries (Pandas, etc.)
Experience setting up and evaluating experiments
Familiarity with Unix/the command line.

Benefits + Perks:
Full medical, dental, and vision insurance + OneMedical membership
Healthcare and Dependent Care FSA
Commuter benefits
401(k)
Unlimited PTO
Fitness reimbursement
Paid maternity/parental leave
We welcome qualified candidates of all races, creeds, genders, and sexuality to apply.

See our California Privacy Policy here.,NYU Grossman School of Medicine is one of the nation’s top-ranked medical schools. For 175 years, NYU Grossman School of Medicine has trained thousands of physicians and scientists who have helped to shape the course of medical history and enrich the lives of countless people. An integral part of NYU Langone Health, the Grossman School of Medicine at its core is committed to improving the human condition through medical education, scientific research, and direct patient care. For more information, go to med.nyu.edu, and interact with us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Position Summary:

We have an exciting opportunity to join our team as a Data Science Analyst/Engineer.

The individual will be positioned to contribute to analytics efforts at NYULH. By teaming up with clinicians, operations and administrative teams, the individual will develop innovative and impactful data-driven healthcare solutions. The Data Scientist/Engineer will report to Dr. Johnson, while working closely with other members of the Division of Healthcare Delivery Science, Datacore, MCIT, and NYU healthcare community at large.

Job Responsibilities:
Performs other duties as assigned.
Lead specific dataoriented projects of high importance, including development, deployment, and evaluation
Design and build data solutions using state of the art machine learning and informatics methods; deploy and integrate these products within the larger ecosystem of healthcare infrastructure at NYULMC
Work with large, complex and noisy clinical datasets for solving challenging problems in the healthcare domain
Build and engineer workflows to collect, store, clean and process structured as well as unstructured data, verify their integrity and appropriateness for specific business processes and analytics systems
Manage associate data scientists, engineers, and clinically trained professionals for testing novel approaches, implementation, maintenance, and improvement of predictive models.
Collaborate with the overall NYULMC healthcare community and contribute to ongoing predictive modeling / analytics efforts
Prepare and present results, reports, both oral and written, to a variety of audiences, concerning processes, models, evaluation, and impact (ROI)
Minimum Qualifications:
To qualify you must have a Master degree in a quantitative discipline (Biomedical Informatics, Computer Science, Machine Learning, Applied Statistics, Mathematics or similar field) and 3 years of
experience in machine learning/ data science.
Proficiency in at least one programming language (Python, R) and machine learning tools.
Knowledge of predictive modeling and machine learning concepts, including design, development, evaluation, deployment and scaling to large datasets.
Familiarity with computing models for big data – Hadoop / MapReduce, Spark etc.
Knowledge of databases (Relational / SQL, NOSQL, MongoDB etc.)
Good grasp of software engineering principles. Experience in integrating modern software architectures.
Knowledge and some experience in operational aspects of software development and deployment, including automation, testing, virtualization and container technology.
Knowledge of clinical and operational aspects of healthcare delivery.
Excellent written and oral communication skills for a variety of audiences.
Preferred Qualifications:
PhD degree in a quantitative field (Biomedical Informatics, Computer Science, Machine Learning, Applied Statistics, Mathematics or similar field) + 2 years experience.
Demonstrated skills in design and implementation of complex machine learning models.
Demonstrated knowledge of software engineering and operational skills through prior projects.
Qualified candidates must be able to effectively communicate with all levels of the organization.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine provides its staff with far more than just a place to work. Rather, we are an institution you can be proud of, an institution where you’ll feel good about devoting your time and your talents.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer committed to diversity and inclusion in all aspects of recruiting and employment. All qualified individuals are encouraged to apply and will receive consideration without regard to race, color, gender, gender identity or expression, sex, sexual orientation, transgender status, gender dysphoria, national origin, age, religion, disability, military and veteran status, marital or parental status, citizenship status, genetic information or any other factor which cannot lawfully be used as a basis for an employment decision. We require applications to be completed online.

If you wish to view NYU Grossman School of Medicine’s EEO policies, please click here. Please click here to view the Federal “EEO is the law” poster or visit https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/ofccpost.htm for more information. To view the Pay Transparency Notice, please click here.,About Ro
Founded in 2017, Ro is a patient-driven telehealth company that puts you in control of your health. We’re patients, just like you, building technology to make healthcare accessible, affordable, and maybe even enjoyable. Ro powers three digital health clinics -- Roman for men’s health, Rory for women’s health, and Zero for fighting smoking addiction -- as well as Ro Pharmacy, a simple and affordable online pharmacy where every medication is $5 per month. The company’s nationwide networking of physicians and pharmacies provides a personalized, end-to-end healthcare experience from online treatment to the delivery of medication and ongoing care. Ro was named #2 in Wellness on Fast Company’s 2019 list of the World’s Most Innovative Companies, and listed by Inc. Magazine as a Best Place to Work in 2020.

We are looking for a Data Analyst, Revenue Analytics, to own all accounting and financial data across Ro. The core responsibilities will be leveraging data to improve Ro’s Accounting and FP&A capabilities, design production data models for financial tracking, assist in data-intensive FP&A projects, and augment our in-house financial analytics engines. This individual is well-versed in accounting principles and excited to leverage their technical skills (esp. SQL) to enable the highest quality in financial reporting systems. They’ll own and lead projects from start to finish and are very capable of distilling details into clear forms of communication for audiences with varying levels of technical and financial backgrounds.

If you think this position sounds like it could be a fit for you, please consider Ro Data’s pitch to prospective candidates.
What you'll Do:
Own the accuracy and accessibility of financial data at Ro. This data comes from many different sources and is used by many different groups, from FP&A to Accounting to Operations.
Own the execution of FP&A analyses that are data intensive and require careful attention to detail
Design production data models for accurate/complete financial tracking. Ro is a very dynamic place and new features (and even new platforms) are being launched all of the time!
Leverage data to improve Ro’s Accounting and FP&A capabilities across all products and initiatives
Offer your technical expertise in preparation and analysis of Finance’s Revenue reporting and communication to upper management.
Lead the expansion, maintenance, and reconciliation of our in-house financial consolidation engine.
Manifest a data-driven culture within the Finance team by ensuring that all reporting and decisions accurately utilize the most powerful data available
Partner with product/engineering to design testing for new financial data models
Liaise between Data and Finance teams to independently own projects/goals while multi-tasking in a fast paced environment
Build out data availability for your team through new tooling, reporting, and BI capabilities

What you'll bring to the team:
Strong experience working with financial data
Strong SQL abilities
Solid knowledge of core accounting, especially revenue accounting
Experience using BI tools (ours is Looker) to effectively convey information
Empathy with others who use your work
Strong problem solving skills, analytical aptitude, and numerical dexterity
Demonstrated track record of project ownership

Bonus Points:
Netsuite exposure
Experience building out BI tools (like Looker)
Basic coding
Unix dexterity
Experience designing data models
Benefits & Perks:
Full medical, dental, and vision insurance + OneMedical membership
Healthcare and Dependent Care FSA
Commuter benefits
401(k)
Unlimited PTO
Fitness reimbursement
Paid maternity/parental leave
We welcome qualified candidates of all races, creeds, genders, and sexuality to apply.

See our California Privacy Policy here.,Medly is a patient-first digital pharmacy that delivers free, same-day prescription medication to patients throughout the nation. At Medly, our mission is to elevate the healthcare journey for all patients - regardless of income, lifestyle, or diagnosis.

We are looking for a Data Analyst with a strong understanding of data acquisition, management, analysis, and reporting. Together, we will uncover and share the story behind Medly’s business metrics.

What you’ll do:
Design and conduct analyses pertaining to data acquired through various sources
Develop, extract and automate reports from multiple data sources
Collaborate with cross-functional teams to facilitate the automation of standard, recurrent data acquisition, management, analysis and reporting
Create descriptive data summaries including visualizations and written descriptions of data findings for a wide range of audiences
Provide technical assistance to stakeholders in accessing and analyzing datasets
What you’ll gain:
Competitive compensation and benefits
Unlimited room for growth and development
The ability to make a noticeable impact and improve lives
What you’ll need:
1 or more years of data analytics experience, preferably in a healthcare environment
Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science, Information Technologies or a related field
Experience using databases with large-scale data sets
Advanced knowledge of Microsoft Excel
Ability to effectively organize and project-manage multiple priorities
Effective problem-solver with strong critical thinking skills
Prior pharmacy experience is a plus!
Strong sense of urgency
Attention to detail
Composure
Integrity
Medly Pharmacy is an equal opportunity employer. We proudly celebrate diversity and are devoted to creating an inclusive environment for all employees regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, military service, or any other non-merit factor.

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $60,000.00 per year

Benefits:
401(k)
Dental Insurance
Flexible Schedule
Health Insurance
Paid Time Off
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Company's website:
https://www.medlypharmacy.com/,Analyst-Data Integrity

There’s potential around every corner in healthcare and Premier helps health system find it. We’re in the field, working shoulder-to-shoulder with our members and member-dedicated field staff to help drive change from the inside out. If you want to be a key player in delivering exceptional clinical insights, knowledge and expertise across key service lines, consider joining our Field Services/Account Management team.

What will you be doing:

Support the planning, execution, and oversight of the account management of supply chain services at our existing member by providing analytics in support of maintaining products/services, documenting high level of customer validated savings, and assisting in expanding current accounts product lines and business solutions. This position will work closely with the assigned health system to determine resources needed to achieve breakthroughs and performance improvement in supply chain products and services, and where applicable, labor cost (productivity and benchmarking), clinical quality / safety programs. All efforts and solutions will be supported by Premier data products and services.

This position works in collaboration with other field Region Specialists, Premier Performance Partner staff, client services, product management, operations, new business development to ensure customer service and value provided exceeds customer expectations. Maintain product and service knowledge and technical competency in all products offered throughout Supply Chain Services. Maintain awareness and knowledge of other business groups to better serve accounts and to drive additional member engagement. Works closely with Premier Integrated Account Team to ensure coordinated account planning and maximize customer value from the Premier relationship.

What we're looking for:

Required Qualifications

Work Experience:

2 or more years applicable experience

Skills & Experience:

Business Analytics, Health Care

Education:

High School Diploma or GED

Preferred Qualifications

Relevant Experience to include:
Experience in healthcare and IT environment preferred
Similar analytic experience preferred
PeopleSoft experience preferred
Ability to prepare and present clinical and/or financial data utilizing Excel, Access, Powerpoint and Premier tools to share cost management and/or clinical performance improvement opportunities
Education:

Bachelors

Premier at a glance:
Ranked number 1 on Charlotte’s Healthiest Employers list for 2019 and 12 Healthiest Employer in America
One of the 2019 World’s Most Ethical Companies® by Ethisphere® Institute for the 12th Year in a Row
The only company to be recognized by KLAS twice for Overall Healthcare Management Consulting
Work with some amazing people to make a real impact in Healthcare
Full of perks and employee discounts
Wellness is in our DNA with onsite exercise classes and online options available
Enjoy giving back to your community? So do we! Employees are even provided with paid time off to volunteer in their communities
We love to learn new things, employees can receive tuition reimbursement as well as professional development opportunities
Premier is looking for smart, agile individuals like you to help us transform the healthcare industry. Here you will find critical thinkers who have the freedom to make an impact. Colleagues who share your thirst to learn more and do things better. Teammates committed to improving the health of a nation. See why incredible challenges require incredible people.

Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to unlawful discrimination because of their age, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, citizenship status, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, marital status, familial status, pregnancy status, genetic information, status as a victim of domestic violence, covered military or protected veteran status, disability, or any other applicable federal, state or local protected class, trait or status or that of persons with whom an applicant associates. We also consider qualified applicants with criminal histories, consistent with applicable federal, state and local law. In addition, as a federal contractor, Premier complies with government regulations, including affirmative action responsibilities, where they apply.

Premier also provides reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with a disability. If you need assistance in the application process, please reply to diversity_and_accomodations@premierinc.com or contact Premier Recruiting at 704.816.5200.,Nice to meet you, we're Vesta Healthcare.

Vesta Healthcare is a startup with a simple mission: Delivering extraordinary outcomes by unlocking the power of caregivers. Caregivers are one of the largest, most untapped resources in the healthcare delivery system and are the unsung heroes of their care recipients. Yet despite their vital role, they are largely unsupported and invisible to the healthcare ecosystem.

At Vesta Healthcare, we enable people with personal assistance to thrive at home, in their community by assuring the people they rely on, their caregivers, have the resources, data, and support they need. We achieve this through a combination of analytics, technology, services, and deep healthcare expertise. Our analytics help identify and target the right people and populations. Our technology creates real-time connectivity and actionable data out of observations. Our services connect to real people who can help when needs arise, and our healthcare expertise helps us understand how we create value for both payers and providers.

Our program monitors in real-time, identifying issues before they become health events, and helping connect those in need with those who can help via technologies such as video, chat, and telephone. Our technology platform includes home-based mobile applications, a clinical dashboard, and data analytics on data not previously available to health professionals. We are disrupting a $109 billion industry and have just closed our latest funding round with a blue-chip list of investors.

We're looking to add to our team of experts who care deeply about our mission.

Our team is passionate, driven, collaborative, intellectually curious, and excited about the opportunity to transform our healthcare system. We're inspired by caregivers and seek to create a platform that recognizes, utilizes and supports the vital role they play. We strive to continuously learn, explore, experiment and achieve results. We are here to improve the quality of life for caregivers and care recipients, allowing them to focus on the important things (like going to the mall with their grandkids)

The ideal teammate would be…

A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired.

The ideal teammate would be able to:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Would you describe yourself as someone who has:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why" and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people's lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment
If yes, then we look forward to speaking to you!

Vesta Healthcare is committed to leveraging the talent of a diverse workforce to create great opportunities for our business and our people. Vesta Healthcare is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. Candidates are selected without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, marital status, or sexual orientation, in accordance with federal and state law.,As a Practice Data Analyst in Physicians of University Hospital, you will support GE/IDX application and revenue cycle. This includes phone and hands on support, education and issue resolution, project work and the running of report queries.

Responsibilities Include:
Extracts patient clinical data from medical records or other sources containing patient clinical data.
Maintains and keeps current with new and existing GE/IDX systems modules, use and applications.
Creates and maintains training material and asssist training new hires and existing employees on current and new GE/IDX applications and features.
Writes supporting documentation and procedures for system changes, modifications and day to day operations.
Assist in the development and testing of test scenarios for new features, patches and hardware.
Troubleshoots with internal and external clients to resolver system, hardware or software errors.
Develops and maintains knowledge of department reporting software to create and run standard and ad hoc reports.
Ensure finance runs are accurate and run on pre-described schedules, to include claims, statements and Collection transfers.
High School Diploma or equivalent, required. Bachelors degree, preferred.
Minimum of two (2) years progressive billing experience including IDX experience, required.
Our Culture:

Transforming care, optimizing patient satisfaction and creating better patient outcomes are just some of the things our talented team members are doing at North Shore-LIJ each and every day. As a culture committed to providing our customers with the highest quality service, we stand behind our core values: Patients first; Caring; Excellence; Innovation; Integrity and Teamwork. It is our commitment and our culture that sets us apart from others and is the cornerstone of everything we do. Join an organization whose team members are valued, cared for and offered continuous opportunities to grow. Click on the link to learn more about us: www.northshorelij.com/goals

Please note: North Shore-LIJ is a smoke-free environment. Smoking and the use of tobacco products is strictly prohibited anywhere on campus, including parking lots and outdoor areas on the premises.Free smoking cessation programs and quit medications are offered to team members who wish to quit through the North Shore-LIJ Center for Tobacco Control.,The Child Mind Institute is seeking a Data Analyst to join the Center for the Developing Brain (CDB) research team. CDB is a research group focused on the development and deployment of sophisticated statistical techniques to understand brain maturation and clinical neuroscience. The Data Analyst will be an integral part of multi-center effort based at the Child Mind Institute to understand the development of the brain’s corticostriatal thalamocortical circuits. These circuits are critical to driving learning, and mapping their development from childhood through adolescence will improve our understanding of how atypical brain development contributes to the emergence of psychiatric symptoms.

The Data Analyst will gain familiarity in running data-intensive methods for neuroimaging data, including multi-site harmonization, quality control, and preprocessing, as well as a suite of cutting edge, data-intensive multivariate and machine learning techniques for analysis of neuroimaging data. An ideal candidate will have a strong work ethic, can work well independently and as part of a team, and has the ambition to deepen an already existing set of strong technical skills.

Reporting to one of our Research Scientists of the Center for the Developing Brain, this is a full-time position, located at the midtown headquarters.

The Child Mind Institute is proud to be named aGreat Place to Work-Certified company! Our competitive compensation and benefits include medical insurance, 401(k) with match, flexible work schedules, paid parental leave, dependent care and discounted tickets and entertainment perks program.

Responsibilities:
Multi-site MRI and behavioral data harmonization, cleaning, and preprocessing
Learning and implementing new statistical methods for intensive analysis of neuroimaging data
Implementation, execution, and maintenance of fMRI imaging analysis pipelines
Perform basic and advanced univariate and multivariate statistical analyses for projects and reports
Develop graphs, reports, and presentations of project results
Assist in preparing data to be shared with research collaborators
Assist with data analysis for research projects and publications
Independent and self-directed learning and skill improvement
Qualifications:
Bachelors or Master’s degree in computer science, neuroscience, engineering, mathematics, statistics or related areas is preferred
Extensive programming experience in one or more open source languages (e.g., Python, R)
Experience with neuroimaging analysis and proficiency with one or more packages (e.g. FreeSurfer, AFNI, FSL, Workbench or SPM) is a plus, but not required.
A passion for the applying computational methods to understand clinical conditions.
Strong interpersonal skills, as well as strong written and oral communication
Ability to work in a fast-paced environment
Ability to work as a member of a team as well as independently
Passion for CMI mission
Please upload your resume, Github profile and writing sample during the application process.

The Child Mind Institute is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate in employment based on race, religion (including religious dress and grooming practices), color, sex/gender (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding or related medical conditions), sex stereotype, gender identity/gender expression/transgender (including whether or not you are transitioning or have transitioned) and sexual orientation; national origin (including language use restrictions and possession of a driver's license issued to persons unable to prove their presence in the united states is authorized under federal law [Vehicle Code section 12801.9]); ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic information/characteristics, marital status/registered domestic partner status, age (40 and over), sexual orientation, military or veteran status, or any other basis protected by federal, state or local law or ordinance or regulation.,NYU Grossman School of Medicine is one of the nation’s top-ranked medical schools. For 175 years, NYU Grossman School of Medicine has trained thousands of physicians and scientists who have helped to shape the course of medical history and enrich the lives of countless people. An integral part of NYU Langone Health, the Grossman School of Medicine at its core is committed to improving the human condition through medical education, scientific research, and direct patient care. For more information, go to med.nyu.edu, and interact with us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Position Summary:
We have an exciting opportunity to join our team as a Data Analyst.

In this role, the successful candidate The Ophthalmic Imaging Research Laboratory in the Department of Ophthalmology is seeking a Data Analyst. Responsibilities will include management of all historical and on-going research data, including databases, images, patient health record information, etc. The individual will be responsible for all data collection and organization. The individual must have at least an undergraduate degree in data or computer science. A background in database programming, data cleaning and query creation is advantageous but not required. Must be able to work independently as well as with a group and have excellent interpersonal skills. Must be extremely organized and pay close attention to detail.

Job Responsibilities:
Image analysis including the processing of the images captured using state of the art prototype imaging software.
Export of clinical images and raw image data for further processing.
Production of new tools and methods to streamline laboratory productivity.
Creation of custom data sets for students and researchers on an ad hoc basis.
Aggregation of data from multiple sources.
Management, clean up, and optimization of a database containing large data sets.
Extraction of information from patient medical records. This will require discrete handling of sensitive patient related information including the de-identification of datasets.
Responsible for all research data collection and organization from historical and on-going studies. This responsibility will be done following a strict timeline.
Minimum Qualifications:
To qualify you must have a 2 years experience or an equivalent combination of education and experience with at least an undergraduate degree in physical sciences or computer science. A background in database programming, data cleaning and query creation is advantageous. The incumbent must be willing to work with minimal supervision or independently under a strict timeline. Some analytical skills will be required. The incumbent must proficient with regards to data collection and analysis. Will not involve any financial responsibility/accountability.

Qualified candidates must be able to effectively communicate with all levels of the organization.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine provides its staff with far more than just a place to work. Rather, we are an institution you can be proud of, an institution where you’ll feel good about devoting your time and your talents.

NYU Grossman School of Medicine is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer committed to diversity and inclusion in all aspects of recruiting and employment. All qualified individuals are encouraged to apply and will receive consideration without regard to race, color, gender, gender identity or expression, sex, sexual orientation, transgender status, gender dysphoria, national origin, age, religion, disability, military and veteran status, marital or parental status, citizenship status, genetic information or any other factor which cannot lawfully be used as a basis for an employment decision. We require applications to be completed online.
If you wish to view NYU Grossman School of Medicine’s EEO policies, please click here. Please click here to view the Federal “EEO is the law” poster or visit https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/ofccpost.htm for more information. To view the Pay Transparency Notice, please click here.,Nice to meet you, we're Vesta Healthcare.Vesta Healthcare is a startup with a simple mission: Delivering extraordinary outcomes by unlocking the power of caregivers. Caregivers are one of the largest, most untapped resources in the healthcare delivery system and are the unsung heroes of their care recipients. Yet despite their vital role, they are largely unsupported and invisible to the healthcare ecosystem.At Vesta Healthcare, we enable people with personal assistance to thrive at home, in their community by assuring the people they rely on, their caregivers, have the resources, data, and support they need. We achieve this through a combination of analytics, technology, services, and deep healthcare expertise. Our analytics help identify and target the right people and populations. Our technology creates real-time connectivity and actionable data out of observations. Our services connect to real people who can help when needs arise, and our healthcare expertise helps us understand how we create value for both payers and providers.Our program monitors in real-time, identifying issues before they become health events, and helping connect those in need with those who can help via technologies such as video, chat, and telephone. Our technology platform includes home-based mobile applications, a clinical dashboard, and data analytics on data not previously available to health professionals. We are disrupting a $109 billion industry and have just closed our latest funding round with a blue-chip list of investors.We're looking to add to our team of experts who care deeply about our mission.Our team is passionate, driven, collaborative, intellectually curious, and excited about the opportunity to transform our healthcare system. We're inspired by caregivers and seek to create a platform that recognizes, utilizes and supports the vital role they play. We strive to continuously learn, explore, experiment and achieve results. We are here to improve the quality of life for caregivers and care recipients, allowing them to focus on the important things (like going to the mall with their grandkids)The ideal teammate would beA data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired.The ideal teammate would be able to:* Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders* Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis* Learn new data related skills and processes* Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis* Share and teach skills to others on the data team* Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals* Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patientsWould you describe yourself as someone who has:* A College degree (required)* 5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)* Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data* MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)* Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)* Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics* Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction* Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers* Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why" and digging deep to find patterns others might miss* Passion about our mission to improve people's lives* Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environmentIf yes, then we look forward to speaking to you!Vesta Healthcare is committed to leveraging the talent of a diverse workforce to create great opportunities for our business and our people. Vesta Healthcare is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. Candidates are selected without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, marital status, or sexual orientation, in accordance with federal and state law.,Strength Through Diversity

Ground breaking science. Advancing
medicine. Healing made personal.

The
Data Analyst I performs activities related to database management, maintenance
of data integrity and security, and basic statistical analyses. The Data Analyst
I facilitates and enhances the value of datasets for faculty researchers and
other analysts through a range of duties and responsibilities. Such duties may
include cleaning, creating, and linking datasets. The Data Analyst I may assist
with the movement of data across multiple systems, oversee its validation and
organization, and ensure that data is available to appropriate people and
systems within an organization.

Roles & Responsibilities:
Develop, maintain, and implement
procedures for data entry, data cleaning, linking data, documentation, and
other tasks
Implement modeling techniques and
tools to support data structure.
Implement best practices in data
management to ensure the integrity of data and quality of data processes
Maintain knowledge of the current
regulations and technologies related to data management
Design and write custom
applications to ensure databases meet requirements throughout data entry,
management, and reporting
Define parameters for file or space
utilization, if necessary
Assist in data capture, extraction,
and analysis
Maintain data integrity, and
support data analysis, as necessary
Document, implement, maintain, and
recommend operating methods to improve collection, cleaning, processing,
editing, distribution, and flow, of data
Deliver analyzable or analyzed data
to internal and external stakeholders
Assist faculty and staff with
queries, simple statistical analyses, report generation, and technical
difficulties related to data retrieval
Assist with writing and preparing
manuscripts and other materials for internal and external audiences
Work closely with IT management and
staff
Performs other duties as needed
Requirements:
Master’s
degree in relevant field with relevant coursework/internships/research
assistantships, OR Bachelor’s degree in relevant field with at least 2 years of
relevant experience
Training
in biostatistics is preferred
Strength Through Diversity

The Mount Sinai Health System
believes that diversity is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion
to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we’re as diverse as the city we
call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us,
you become a part of Mount Sinai’s unrivaled record of achievement, education
and advancement as we revolutionize medicine together.

We work hard to acquire and retain
the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where
you can develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees,
regardless of job title or expertise, can make an impact on quality patient
care.

Explore more about this opportunity
and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!
Who We Are

Over 38,000 employees strong, the
mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient
care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled
education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.

Formed in September 2013, The Mount
Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai with seven premier hospital campuses, including Mount Sinai Beth
Israel, Mount Sinai Beth Israel Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai
Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St.
Luke’s, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an
equal opportunity employer. We promote recognition and respect for individual
and cultural differences, and we work to make our employees feel valued and
appreciated, whatever their race, gender, background, or sexual
orientation.

EOE Minorities/,Strength Through
Diversity

Ground breaking science.
Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.

The Data Analyst II leads and performs activities related to database
management, maintenance of data integrity
and security, and basic statistical analyses. The IBD Research Group and the
integrated System for IBD daTa Exchange (iSITE) at Mount Sinai is seeking a
highly motivated and skilled Data Analyst to join their data analytics team.
The position will play a key role with data integration and analytics for their
cutting edge research. This position will lead a variety of projects and gain
exposure to many productive areas of research, including clinical and
translational, genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic research.

The Data Analyst II facilitates and enhances the value of
datasets for faculty researchers and other analysts through a range of duties
and responsibilities. Such duties include cleaning, creating, and linking
datasets large and/or complex data sets.

The Mount Sinai IBD Research Group is one of the
international leaders in IBD investigation with a longstanding tradition of
major contributions to the field, and the IBD research is supported by one of
the leading IBD clinical centers in the world. This position has growth
potential for the individual to take on more independence in data analysis and
supervision of other research staff.
Roles & Responsibilities:
Translates, merges, cleans, and maps data in
large and/or complex data sets
Develop, maintain, implement, and document
operating procedures for collection, cleaning, processing, editing, linking, distribution, and flow
of data
Design and write custom applications to ensure
databases meet requirements throughout data entry, management, and reporting
Identifies, develops, and documents data
standardization, data enrichment operations, and data validations
Recognizes recurring issues and analyzes causes
in order to generate improvement plans and provides tools/techniques to measure
success
Maintains knowledge of the current regulations
and technologies related to data management and Implements best practices in data management to
ensure the integrity of data and quality of data processes
Deliver analyzable or analyzed data to internal
and external stakeholders
Assist faculty and staff with queries, basic
statistical analyses, reports and technical difficulties related to data retrieval
Trains staff with varying degrees of knowledge to
effectively use the database system
Assist with primary data collection if requested
Interface and coordinate with basic science and
translational science collaborators and core facilities for tracking and quality control for
bio-sample collections
May access data in the Data Warehouse and other
electronic health care system-linked databases,
as required
Ability to work independently and to work closely
with leadership, supervisors and staff
Uses modeling techniques and tools in analyzing
and specifying data structure in large and/or complex data sets
Provide quarterly updates on overall enrollment
in established and prospectively enrolling studies
May assist writing and preparing manuscripts,
grants and other materials for internal and external audiences
Performs other related duties
Requirements:
Masters degree in
public health, epidemiology, or in a social science with a heavy emphasis on quantitative data
analysis Or Bachelors degree in computer science, statistics and/or related field with 3+ years of experience
Experience: 3 to 4
years of experience using R (preferred) and python working with large and complicated data sets (e.g., data
manipulation, data analysis, or data cleaning), preferably in a
medical or healthcare setting
Experience working
with and manipulating a wide range of large biological data sets, including
clinical, genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic
data
Demonstrated
proficiency with data analysis, visualization, and cleaning using a statistical software package (R, Python)
Working knowledge
of Ruby
Demonstrated
proficiency working with SQL data bases and coding in SQL
Strength Through
Diversity

The Mount Sinai Health
System believes that diversity and inclusion is a driver for excellence. We
share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet were as
diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and
lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinais unrivaled
record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize healthcare
delivery together.

We work hard to recruit
and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work
environment where you have the opportunity and support to develop
professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title
or expertise, have an impact on quality patient care.

Explore more about this
opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!
Who We Are

Over 38,000 employees
strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide
compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine
through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse
communities we serve.

Formed in September
2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospitals, including Mount Sinai
Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai
Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St.
Lukes, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

The Mount Sinai Health
System is an equal opportunity employer. We comply with applicable Federal
civil rights laws and does not discriminate, exclude, or treat people
differently on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, religion,
disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender
expression.

EOE
Minorities/Women/Disabled/Veterans,The Child Mind Institute is seeking a Data Analyst for our Student Success Program. The Student Success Program brings school-wide mental health supports and evidence-based treatment groups to schools throughout the New York and San Francisco area. Since 2012, the Student Success Program has reached over 40,000 students, educators, parents, and school staff, and our community-based clinicians work in over 100 schools per year in NY and CA. Data to this point indicate significant symptom improvement and time-on-task in students who participate in our evidence-based small group interventions, in addition to improvements in educator stress management and efficacy in delivery of mental health support strategies in the classroom. The Data Analysts role will be to work with staff to streamline, digitize, and analyze existing data collected from our comprehensive, multi-tiered, in-school interventions while also expanding and developing more in-depth, long-term, quantitative and qualitative outcome tracking from our educator professional development, social-emotional curriculum, and new and emerging initiatives in in-school intervention and support.

Reporting to Rebecca Fleischman, Associate Director of National Programs and Outreach, this is an exempt, full-time position located in our NYC headquarters. We offer competitive salary and benefits.

The Child Mind Institute is proud to be named a Great Place to Work-Certified company! Our competitive compensation and benefits include medical insurance, 401(k) with match, flexible work schedules, paid parental leave, dependent care and discounted tickets and entertainment perks program.

Responsibilities:
Implementation, execution, and maintenance of Student Success Program data collection, tracking, analysis, and reporting
Exploration of novel digital solutions and streamlining options for data collection and analysis
Work with National Programs staff to expand and amplify short-term and longitudinal data collection on all program components and emerging initiatives
Perform analyses and prepare summaries for projects and reports
Develop graphs, reports, and presentations of project results
Other duties as assigned by Associate Director of National Programs and Outreach
Qualifications:
B.A/B.S. in computer science, mathematics, statistics or related areas. Masters degree a plus.
Prior experience in program, intervention, or nonprofit data collection/analysis/reporting
Experience in preparing data reports for internal/external communication, funders, or partner organizations
Strong interpersonal and communication skills and demonstrated ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with a wide range of individuals/groups.
Motivated self-starter with great attitude, flexibility, and entrepreneurial spirit.
Able to work under pressure to prioritize and manage workload, manage simultaneous tasks, and meet deadlines within a fast paced and changing environment.
Flexibility to work hours to meet productivity goals and deadlines.
Strong teamwork ethic; positive, flexible attitude; ability to take complete ownership of responsibilities.
A passion for the Child Mind Institute mission
Please upload your resume and cover letter during the application process.

The Child Mind Institute is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate in employment based on race, religion (including religious dress and grooming practices), color, sex/gender (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding or related medical conditions), sex stereotype, gender identity/gender expression/transgender (including whether or not you are transitioning or have transitioned) and sexual orientation; national origin (including language use restrictions and possession of a driver's license issued to persons unable to prove their presence in the United States is authorized under federal law [Vehicle Code section 12801.9]); ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic information/characteristics, marital status/registered domestic partner status, age (40 and over), sexual orientation, military or veteran status, or any other basis protected by federal, state or local law or ordinance or regulation.,Position Summary

Under the supervision of the Program Manager/Site Coordinator, the Data Collection Analyst will perform data quality control and quality assurance activities according to study-specific procedures and site standard operating procedures; print and compile paper research data forms; maintain participant files in organized, accessible storage system; enter accurate and complete study data in electronic databases or fax/email/scan case report forms to statistical center as needed; respond to study data queries from the data management center, as directed by the site coordinator. Other support functions to advance study goals include preparation of study data to fulfill funder requirements and for dissemination; track use and replenishment of study supplies; and other duties as assigned.

This position is grant funded.

MAJOR ACCOUNTABILITIES

Conduct all research activities in accordance with study protocol and procedures and other appropriate institutional regulations, procedures and policies, including procedures to safeguard confidentiality of study participants.
Assist the data manager and site coordinator in the performance of quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) procedures including review of case report forms and source documents in a timely manner prior to transmission to the data management and statistical center; as well as conduct quarterly chart review of all screened and enrolled participant’s case report forms and source documents.
Assist with submission of study forms to the statistical and data management center.
Assist with prompt review of all data queries and their immediate resolution.
Assist the data manager and site coordinator in identifying problem areas with data collection, report findings to the site leadership, and develop appropriate corrective measures with input from the study team.
Assist in the review of eligibility criteria of screened study participants for enrollment, including review of eligibility case report forms, source documents and informed consent forms.
Help study team prepare and submit protocol non-adherence and protocol deviation forms, as needed.
Print and compile materials needed for informed consent process, study data collection, and participant follow up and recruitment.
Organize and file study materials including case report forms and other study documents.
Assist in the preparation of study data for monitoring visits, reporting, and dissemination.
Assist with data collection and analysis; work on analysis of quantitative and qualitative data from cross-sectional surveys, interviews and other resources, if applicable.
Assist in the recruitment of study participants, help develop interview protocols and conduct interviews, if applicable.
Participate in regular meetings with study staff and site leadership to ensure high-quality performance of job responsibilities.
Attend study related trainings and meetings as requested by the site coordinator.
Perform other study-related duties as assigned including but not limited to assisting study participants, greeting visitors at the site, answering the door, answering the phone etc.
Perform other related duties as assigned

EXPERIENCE, SKILLS & MINIMUM REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS

High school Diploma and at least 1.5 years of related experience or equivalent in education, training and experience
Proficiency in Microsoft Office desktop applications
Excellent interpersonal, communication and organizational skills
Flexible, open-minded, and able to easily adapt to new challenges

Preferred Qualifications

Bachelor’s degree preferred
Experience working with diverse, medically underserved populations and high-risk communities
Experience working with research and data management, data entry or electronic data capture is highly desired

APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS

Interested and qualified candidates, please apply here,Position Summary

Under the supervision of the Program Manager/Site Coordinator, the Data Collection Analyst will perform data quality control and quality assurance activities according to study-specific procedures and site standard operating procedures; print and compile paper research data forms; maintain participant files in organized, accessible storage system; enter accurate and complete study data in electronic databases or fax/email/scan case report forms to statistical center as needed; respond to study data queries from the data management center, as directed by the site coordinator. Other support functions to advance study goals include preparation of study data to fulfill funder requirements and for dissemination; track use and replenishment of study supplies; and other duties as assigned.

Responsibilities
Conduct all research activities in accordance with study protocol and procedures and other appropriate institutional regulations, procedures and policies, including procedures to safeguard confidentiality of study participants. 15%
Assist the data manager and site coordinator in the performance of quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) procedures including review of case report forms and source documents in a timely manner prior to transmission to the data management and statistical center; as well as conduct quarterly chart review of all screened and enrolled participants case report forms and source documents. 15%
Assist with submission of study forms to the statistical and data management center. 5%
Assist with prompt review of all data queries and their immediate resolution. 5%
Assist the data manager and site coordinator in identifying problem areas with data collection, report findings to the site leadership, and develop appropriate corrective measures with input from the study team. 10%
Assist in the review of eligibility criteria of screened study participants for enrollment, including review of eligibility case report forms, source documents and informed consent forms. 10%
Help study team prepare and submit protocol non-adherence and protocol deviation forms, as needed. 5%
Print and compile materials needed for informed consent process, study data collection, and participant follow up and recruitment.
Organize and file study materials including case report forms and other study documents. 5%
Assist in the preparation of study data for monitoring visits, reporting, and dissemination. 5%
Assist with data collection and analysis; work on analysis of quantitative and qualitative data from cross-sectional surveys, interviews and other resources, if applicable. 5%
Assist in the recruitment of study participants, help develop interview protocols and conduct interviews, if applicable. 5%
Participate in regular meetings with study staff and site leadership to ensure high-quality performance of job responsibilities.
Attend study related trainings and meetings as requested by the site coordinator. 5%
Perform other study-related duties as assigned including but not limited to assisting study participants, greeting visitors at the site, answering the door, answering the phone etc. 5%
Perform other related duties as assigned 5%
Minimum Qualifications
High school Diploma and at least 1.5 years of related experience or equivalent in education, training and experience
Proficiency in Microsoft Office desktop applications
Excellent interpersonal, communication and organizational skills
Flexible, open-minded, and able to easily adapt to new challenges
Preferred Qualifications
Bachelors degree preferred
Experience working with diverse, medically underserved populations and high-risk communities
Experience working with research and data management, data entry or electronic data capture is highly desired
Equal Opportunity Employer / Disability / Veteran

Columbia University is committed to the hiring of qualified local residents.,Senior Data Analyst. (Tarrytown, NY). Coordinate, develop and implements report/indicator to measure quality and productivity for coding functions. Evaluate programs and initiatives to improve HIM Department’s efficiency in revenue cycle process. Assist leadership define new interventions, automate surveillance, analyze and present data to support operations. Bachelor’s in Public Administration, or Health Management, or Health Finance Management with 3-yr. exp. in complex health environment. Master’s degree in any of the above is acceptable, in lieu of the 3-yr. experience. Mail CV: Montefiore Medical Center, 3411 Wayne Avenue, Bronx, NY 10467, Attn: Leticia Roldan, Staffing Supervisor.

Department: Health Information Management Bargaining Unit: Non Union Campus: MOSES Employment Status: Regular Full-Time Address: 555 South Broadway, Tarrytown
Shift: Day Scheduled Hours: 8:30 AM-5 PM Req ID: 114563

Montefiore is an equal employment opportunity employer. Montefiore will recruit, hire, train, transfer, promote, layoff and discharge associates in all job classifications without regard to their race, color, religion, creed, national origin, alienage or citizenship status, age, gender, actual or presumed disability, history of disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic predisposition or carrier status, pregnancy, military status, marital status, or partnership status, or any other characteristic protected by law.

#LI-YH1,ProHEALTH is one of the largest private multi-specialty medical practices in the Northeast and has been serving the health needs of Long Island and the Greater New York Metropolitan area since 1997. With over 900 providers in 300 locations, our goal is to provide quality health care to ensure that our patients get the right care at the right time.

We’re a dynamic and growing health care organization, offering a wide range of employment opportunities. We are seeking professional and dedicated individuals to be part of our team, where integrity, respect, accountability, and collaboration are among our core principles.

We offer our employees competitive compensation and benefits, flexibility and opportunity for growth and advancement.

ProHEALTH Care, part of Optum Care, is at the forefront of applying data analytics to our business. Our team will develop and manage analytics for our value-based initiatives, and provide expert support to categorize patients by health risk and disease burden. Healthcare and claims data analysis experience, an understanding of the popular data analysis tools and databases are a path to success. Interpret data and turn it into information, assisting the business team in making decisions. Collate information from source systems and interpret patterns and trends. Must have very strong SQL skills, with knowledge of Healthcare contracting, care management, and quality metrics.

•Provide expertise in preparing data for analysis using a variety of tools

•Build proactive data validation automation to catch data integrity issues

•Provide expertise in report development and data analysis.

•Perform predictive analytics on variety data sources

•Extracting data from sources, and reorganizing data to a format that can be understood by business users.

•Innovate and support risk analysis, identify gaps in care using claims, clinical and finance data

•Identify opportunities to improve performance of our programs

•Identify opportunities to develop and analytically support care management initiatives

•Improves quality of patient care by analyzing results; monitoring variances; identifying trends; recommending actions to management.

•Provide quality assurance of imported data, working with quality assurance analyst if necessary.

•Use statistical tools to interpret data sets, applying analysis to develop trends and patterns

•Strong ability to troubleshoot and resolve data issues

•Work independently and with team members to understand database structure and business processes

•Supporting the data warehouse in identifying and revising reporting requirements.

•Work with management to prioritize business and patient needs

•Handle confidential data and information according to guidelines.

What you’ll do:

•Work with a variety of data sources - extracting knowledge and actionable information

•Be passionate about solving problems – attack data and find solutions to business questions

•Present your results to stakeholders

•Support the business with ad hoc reporting

•Support the organization’s goals in clinical integration and reporting

•Create meaningful and comprehensive reports by merging data sources

•Continuously strive for a deeper understanding of our business drivers

•Participate as a member of cross-functional squads that includes data analysts, data engineers, software engineers, and business leaders

•Gather requirements from different business units, translate that to engineering problems, and explain the results to non-technical teammates

Data Analyst Requirements:

•Bachelor’s degree from an accredited university or college in computer science, analytics, or healthcare-related degree.

•3+ years experience in a healthcare environment, extensive experience in care management and/or analytics preferred.

•Demonstrated skill with SQL (any platform). Must be able to generate sql solutions against multiple data sources, have knowledge of joins.

•Demonstrated expertise in Excel, with deep knowledge of features

•Expert in Tableau Desktop Dashboard creation; knowledge of other visual platforms a plus. •

Work experience as a data analyst or in healthcare-related field.

•Experience in clinical analytics and/or care management modeling preferred

•Ability to work with stakeholders at all levels

•High-level written and verbal communication skills.

ProHEALTH strives to maintain a workplace that accepts and appreciates the differences among our employees. The company will not discriminate against any applicant or employee based on age, race, gender, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital status, covered veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or expression, genetic information, status with respect to public assistance or any other characteristic protected by state, federal, or local law.,Strength Through Diversity

Ground breaking science. Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.

The Data Analyst I performs activities related to database management, maintenance of data integrity and security, and basic statistical analyses. The Data Analyst I facilitates and enhances the value of datasets for faculty researchers and other analysts through a range of duties and responsibilities. Such duties may include cleaning, creating, and linking datasets. The Data Analyst I may assist with the movement of data across multiple systems, oversee its validation and organization, and ensure that data is available to appropriate people and systems within an organization.

Roles & Responsibilities:
Develop, maintain, and implement procedures for data entry, data cleaning, linking data, documentation, and other tasks
Implement modeling techniques and tools to support data structure.
Implement best practices in data management to ensure the integrity of data and quality of data processes
Maintain knowledge of the current regulations and technologies related to data management
Design and write custom applications to ensure databases meet requirements throughout data entry, management, and reporting
Define parameters for file or space utilization, if necessary
Assist in data capture, extraction, and analysis
Maintain data integrity, and support data analysis, as necessary
Document, implement, maintain, and recommend operating methods to improve collection, cleaning, processing, editing, distribution, and flow, of data
Deliver analyzable or analyzed data to internal and external stakeholders
Assist faculty and staff with queries, simple statistical analyses, report generation, and technical difficulties related to data retrieval
Assist with writing and preparing manuscripts and other materials for internal and external audiences
Work closely with IT management and staff
Performs other duties as needed
Requirements:
Master's degree in relevant field with relevant coursework/internships/research assistantships, OR Bachelor's degree in relevant field with at least 2 years of relevant experience
Training in biostatistics is preferred
Strength Through Diversity

The Mount Sinai Health System believes that diversity is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we're as diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinai's unrivaled record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize medicine together.

We work hard to acquire and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where you can develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title or expertise, can make an impact on quality patient care.

Explore more about this opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!

Who We Are

Over 38,000 employees strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.

Formed in September 2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospital campuses, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Beth Israel Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St. Luke's, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an equal opportunity employer. We promote recognition and respect for individual and cultural differences, and we work to make our employees feel valued and appreciated, whatever their race, gender, background, or sexual orientation.

EOE Minorities/,The Data Analyst supports the Managed Care Department by assisting in the development of quality improvement and validation studies, The Data Analyst is responsible for analyzing data, writing reports for large and small-scale research studies, developing and managing internal databases, and designing and producing plan technical, Access And Availability and other data reports.

QUALIFICATIONS:
Strong analytical skills, with the ability to prepare cogent analyses using a variety of statistical, spreadsheet and database programs.
Exceptional writing skills, with the ability to clearly and thoroughly present quantitative and qualitative review findings to interested parties with varying technical backgrounds. Ability to write well and quickly.
Excellent communication skills; in particular, able to provide technical assistance to MCO staff and able to actively participate in quality improvement group meetings.
Ability to coordinate workgroups to design quality improvement studies.
Ability to handle all aspects in the full cycle of a research project.
Ability to work independently and with minimal supervision.
Ability to manage time effectively and meet client deliverables.
Ability to relate to staff at all levels of familiarity with computers and statistics.
Must have flexibility of work hours and ability to travel when needed.
EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
Bachelor’s degree in an analytical, research or health-related field (required); Master’s degree in public administration, public policy, public health or related social science with course work including both statistical and process analysis (preferred);
One year experience working in a health care field preferred; and
Experience with a variety of software packages, particularly Word, SAS/SPSS, Excel, Access and PowerPoint preferred.
IPRO offers a comprehensive benefits package.

IPRO is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment for without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or protected veteran status,Marketing Statement

Empower Every New Yorker — Without Exception — to Live the Healthiest Life Possible

NYC Health + Hospitals is the largest public health care system in the United States. We provide essential outpatient, inpatient and home-based services to more than one million New Yorkers every year across the city’s five boroughs. Our large health system consists of ambulatory centers, acute care centers, post-acute care/long-term care, rehabilitation programs, Home Care, and Correctional Health Services. Our diverse workforce is uniquely focused on empowering New Yorkers, without exception, to live the healthiest life possible.
Job Description

The DnA Ambassador is responsible for serving as the conduit between the DnA professionals and the DnA citizens.

Duties and responsibilities include:
Become familiar with our full DnA services portfolio.
Serve as an advocate to our user population (DnA citizens) for the use of the DnA services portfolio.
Support DnA citizens with the technology and processes as defined by the self service delivery model.
Become knowledgeable with the data literacy knowledge base and concepts.
Serve as a first line of onsite support for DnA citizens and DnA champions.
Evaluate data request prior to escalation to the data services team.
Train users on how to use foundational services and corresponding features.
Inform DnA service owners of feedback about DnA services in order to help introduce improvement cycles.
Work with site CMIOs, site directors, Epic reporting liaisons and other local teams to improve data entry into the EHR and other critical line of business systems.
Create training programs to improve data quality and access to data.
Progressively become a subject matter expert in at least three data and analytics services/systems.
Identify candidates to serve as DnA champions.
Develop collaborative relationships with DnA champions by extending awareness of DnA services and become aware of local data related challenges.
Assist DnA citizens to gain data access.
Other related duties, as required.
Level: A DnA Ambassador leverages knowledge in data and analytics concepts and /or subject matter expertise to forge relationships with DnA citizens and DnA professionals to support the improvement and access of data and analytics services. The Ambassador 2 demonstrates high acumen in customer service, communications and influencing skills. They are expert motivators, coaches and trainers. The level 2 Ambassador is expected to be a subject matter expert in a mission relevant domain. Applies advanced knowledge of job area typically obtained through advanced education and work experience. Responsibilities may include: Managing projects / processes, working independently with limited supervision. Coaching and reviewing the work of lower level professionals. Problems faced are difficult and sometimes complex.
Minimum Qualifications

1. A Masters degree or advanced clinical degree from an accredited college or university; or
A Baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university and one (1) year of experience gathering and documenting business, clinical, and/or functional requirements for software applications development and implementation in a clinical, allied health, non-allied health, behavioral health, information technology, information services, business, analytics or related area; or, one (1) year of experience in a relevant clinical and/or healthcare administration role/function; or
A satisfactory combination of education, training, and experience.
Specialty certification(s) issued by a national commercially available program, state, professional society, academic or technical institution in an area(s) listed above, may be credited on a month-to-month basis toward the required work experience for a total of one (1) year.
Department Preferences

Preference will be given to those with:
7+ years of experience in a health care related field.
Certificates in data and analytics, PMO, process improvement and other systems.
Strong interpersonal skills.
Ability to take complex concepts and distill into simpler themes for presentation to users.
Ability to work on multiple projects concurrently.
Demonstrated leadership skills.
Able to learn new concepts and technologies and train others.
How To Apply

If you wish to apply for this position, please apply online by clicking the "Apply Now" button.

If applying online, please include your cover letter in the same file attachment with your uploaded resume.,Strength Through DiversityGround breaking science. Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.Roles & Responsibilities:* The Data Analyst I is responsible for implementing best information technology data management practices in an effort to improve and ensure quality, streamline data cleaning efforts and deliver analyzable databases within agreed upon project timelines.Requirements:* Bachelor's degree in computer science, statistics and/or related field. Master's degree in relevant field of study preferred.* 2-3 years database application/management experience, preferably in a large medical center or healthcare environment.Strength Through DiversityThe Mount Sinai Health System believes that diversity is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we're as diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinai's unrivaled record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize medicine together.We work hard to acquire and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where you can develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title or expertise, can make an impact on quality patient care.Explore more about this opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!Who We AreOver 38,000 employees strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.Formed in September 2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospital campuses, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Beth Israel Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St. Luke's, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.The Mount Sinai Health System is an equal opportunity employer. We comply with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate, exclude, or treat people differently on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.EOE Minorities/Women/Disabled/Veterans,As an Analyst you will analyze, implement and maintain department related databases and software. Serve as a liaison between department’s analytical needs and technical data storage systems and files. Collaborate with stakeholders to document requirements for reporting. Develop analytic reports and dashboards utilizing various databases and third party data files.

Responsibilities Include:
• Identify strategies for evaluation of key performance indicators (KPI’s), quality metrics, outcomes evaluation, population management studies, etc.

• Develops technical and functional specifications based on business requirements and analysis of relevant workflows.

• Manages all database processing functions, including merge/purge, data hygiene, data appends, and coordination with 3rd party vendors.

• Identifies issues in data quality that would impact reporting (i.e. duplicate records, missing data, etc.)

• Identifies methods of data visualization and presentation principles to ensure effective and impactful communication of projects to management.

• Maintains trends and tracks various measures to fully utilize the capabilities of databases and data files.

• Integrates add-on programs to eliminate or streamline back end processes.

• Serves as a liaison between departments analytical needs and technical data storage systems and files

• Bachelor’s Degree Business Administration, Computer Science/Technology, Mathematics, Statistics, or related field, required.
• Minimum of three (3) years progressively responsible experience working with databases, reporting applications and/or business intelligence applications, required.
• Experience with database tools (SQL, Excel PivotTables, MS Sql Server), highly preferred. Tableau highly preferred.
• Advanced experience with Microsoft Office, required.
• Reporting and analysis skills, required.
• Thorough knowledge of Database structures, ensuring optimal logical model and effective/efficient mapping to physical structure.
• Strong interpersonal, communication and problem solving skills, required.,Encounter Data Analyst, Lake Success
General Information
Job Title:
Encounter Data Analyst
Location:
1981 MARCUS AVE SUITE 100
Lake Success, NY, 11042
United States
Employee Type:
Full-Time
Job Category:
Analytics
Industry:
Healthcare
Required Degree:
4 Year Degree
Contact information
Name:
Drew Baker
Phone:
347-505-3573
Email:
dbaker@integraplan.org
Description
General Purpose/Scope:

The Encounter Data Analyst evaluates encounter data and identifies errors created by operational, claims, and eligibility processes. This position will research, analyze, summarize, and categorize all types of encounters based on response files from NYSDOH and CMS, as appropriate. This position will also work closely with other internal departments, delegated vendors, and government agencies to monitor and communicate that the paid and denied claims adjudicated are accurately submitted and processed to the NYSDOH and CMS, as appropriate. These claims, called ‘encounter data,’ are submitted along with member and provider files from the plans, and are critical data inputs used to inform program total cost of care, quality, and utilization – which are ultimately used to inform risk sharing and other incentive-based payments from the NYSDOH to the ACOs and MCOs.

The Encounter Data Analyst will need to understand the overall data, process flows, and provider data specifications used within the NYSDOH, and work with the Data Warehouse and Analytics teams to create targeted and ongoing reports to track data accuracy and timeliness; and support ACO and MCO management teams in working collaboratively with partners to improve overall encounter, member, and provider data quality.

Responsibilities Include:
Retrieves, compiles, reviews, and ensures the accuracy of encounter data from Integra systems and delegated vendor sources, using an 837-file format.
Will need to be able to access data from the Integra Data Warehouse using a variety of tools such as MS Access and SAS Enterprise Guide.
Summarizes large volumes of encounter data in analytical reports that include tables, graphs, qualitative and quantitative analyses for management review and use.
Reviews and ensures the accuracy of reports and corrects discrepancies.
Works closely with IT to ensure data completeness, data accuracy, and data availability.
Assists in the development of reports and projects, including documenting methodology, protocols, analysis, and design.
Programs using SAS, SQL or other appropriate software to generate reports based on input/direction from management and other report users.
Collaborates with other departments and vendors to identify missing data, errors or other anomalies; works with them to correct these encounter data errors, gathers necessary information and provides guidance on regulatory reporting needs.
Monitors encounter data integrity of various databases and create monthly, quarterly and ad-hoc reports.
Initiates and maintains internal contacts to secure current/correct encounter data necessary for clear presentations of all reports, special projects, etc.
Assists in the development of analysis plans, which includes documenting analyses methodology, protocols, and design.
Researches, recommends and implements efficient means of data collection, maintenance, and analysis.
Reviews and identifies trends and variances in encounter data and reporting.
Researches findings and determines the appropriateness of elevating identified issues to leadership for further review/evaluation/action.
Performs special projects and other duties, as needed.
Qualifications:
Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Public Health, Healthcare Informatics, Health Administration, Statistics, or other relevant discipline required
Minimum 2 years of increasingly responsible data analysis/reporting experience in a healthcare setting
Minimum of 1 year performing encounter data analysis of APD, EDPS, and/or RAPs in a health care or health plan organization
Skills/Abilities:
Knowledge of encounter data processes, files, etc.
Computer proficiency in Outlook, Word, PowerPoint. Advanced proficiency in personal computer programs, including MS Excel (including formulas, sorts, filters, pivot tables, IF statements, VLOOKUP, HLOOKUP, etc), MS Access (criteria statements, table links, and database and report creation).
Experience working within a data warehouse environment
Strong detail orientation and organizational skills
Effective oral, written, and interpersonal communication skills required
Knowledge of MLTC and Medicare Advantage encounter data analytics preferred
Knowledge of SAS Enterprise Guide, SAS Base programming preferred
Integra is an Equal Opportunity Employer and prohibits discrimination or harassment based on any characteristics protected by the laws or regulations in the locations where we operate.

If this opportunity sounds exciting and challenging to you, please apply.,Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people s lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Minimum Years of Experience: 5

Sub Specialties: Business Analyst- Associate,OVERVIEW
AbleTo is the leading provider of high quality, technology-enabled behavioral health care. AbleTo believes that everyone deserves access to high-quality care, and offers a suite of technology-enabled services to empower people to lead better lives through better mental health. A proprietary platform connects individuals with AbleTo highly trained licensed providers who deliver weekly sessions by phone or video supported by an integrated digital experience. Members also have access to mental health coaches, and digital support programs. Clinical best practices are leveraged across all services to ensure individuals are getting the care they need. Our outcomes-focused care is proven to improve depression and anxiety by over 50% on average, as demonstrated in several peer-reviewed studies. For patients with high-cost medical conditions, our clinically-tailored treatment is proven to reduce medical costs with care that empowers the patient to address their health needs. AbleTo partners with payers to make high-quality care accessible, affordable and convenient for millions of people to get the treatment they need.
TEAM
The Data & Analytics (D&A) team plays a key role at AbleTo, with objectives that include supporting company operations, scaling data knowledge across organization, acting as internal data consultants, and identifying / running high-impact analyses.
Under D&A team, there are four highly collaborative work teams:
The data engineering team ingests data received from clients and implements new clients and new data sources;
The data science team creates and improves predictive models to identify patients who could benefit from our programs;
The business insights team develops operational reports to track company performance and delivers insights to improve products and operations.
The advanced analytics team develops statistical studies to support business questions.

ROLE RESPONSIBILITIES
Analytical Advisor
Become a trusted partner to the product team by proactively identifying opportunities (e.g., improve engagement, clinical adherence, patient experience) and using analytical insights to address them
Design, develop, and evaluate data driven experiments to test product hypotheses
Develop dashboards / reports to support the product management team
Technical Problem Solver
Ensure relevant data is captured in source systems, and made available for business intelligence applications
Work with data engineering to establish high-quality data governance rules to ensure clean data for reporting
Contribute to the development of data team documentation and the maintenance of a data dictionary
Automate time-consuming reporting and data discovery processes for end-users

POSITION REQUIREMENTS
Preferred Experience:
4+ years of relevant work experience in or across data analytics, management consulting, or product management
A year of more in healthcare, preferably at a healthcare provider or health system
BS in Mathematics, Economics , Finance, or another business related discipline. Advanced business or analytical degree is a plus
Competencies:
Typical consulting skill set inclusive of presentation development, strong analytical capabilities, and a comfort framing complex problems into structured deliverables
Ability to design data driven experiments that support evaluation of product hypotheses
Familiarity with BI and data visualization tools such as Looker (preferred) or Tableau
Strong SQL skills
Foundational knowledge of GCP / and or AWS platforms
Who You Are:
Data Storyteller. You understand the importance of data in decision making, and you can convince key stakeholders to go the "last mile" that converts insights into actions
Creative problem-solver. We are dreaming up a new, better mental health system. You aren’t afraid to generate innovative ideas that help us solve problems.
Gritty. You don't need to wait for people to tell you what to work on, and work around / through barriers. You have a results oriented track record of exceeding expectations.
Organized. You are adept at project management, and you can keep yourself and others organized through a complex process.
Positive, team player. Your teammates know you as someone who they enjoy working with, who is upbeat, and who gets things done
Follow AbleTo on LinkedIn, Twitter, and Instagram!,Strength Through DiversityGround breaking science. Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.The Data Analyst II oversees activities related to data integrity, security and enhancement of the value of data. The Data Analyst II may direct the movement of data across multiple systems; oversee its validation and organization and make sure that data is available to appropriate people and systems within an organization. The Data Analyst II will also develop and execute reports that will be important assets of the practice as they continue to develop and evaluate a new model of care.Roles & Responsibilities:* Work with the clinical and administrative staff of the practice to define data reporting needs* Develop analytic reports that are easily understandable by clinical and administrative staff* Use modeling techniques and tools in analyzing and specifying data structure* Implement best practices in data management to ensure the integrity of the data, the quality of data processes and deliver analyzable or analyzed data to a variety of internal and external clients of the affiliated practice* Maintain data integrity and completes data analysis as necessary* Complete data capture, data extraction and analysis* Develop, maintain or implement procedures for data entry, data cleaning, documentation and other administrative tasks* Document, implement, maintain or recommend operating methods to improve processing, distribution, data flow, collection, database editing procedures* May define parameters for file or space utilization* Work closely with IT management and staff* Access data in the Data Warehouse, as required* Assist clinical and administrative staff with queries, statistical analyses, reports and technical difficulties related to data retrieval* Design and write custom applications needed to ensure the database meets requirements for the entry, management and reporting of data* Identify and recommend solutions to data management issues* Maintain knowledge of the current regulations and technologies related to data management* Write and prepare manuscripts and other materials for internal and external audiences* Perform other related duties* Help to build and perpetuate a practice environment and culture of collaboration, respect, learning, flexibility and fun among all team membersRequirements:* Bachelor's degree or equivalent education/work experience. Master's degree in relevant field of study preferred* 3 years of analytics experience including report development and database application/management experience, preferably in a large medical center or healthcare environment* Advanced knowledge of database applications / management, SQL and /or SAS. Knowledge of computer programming preferred* Excellent conceptualization, design and analytical skills* Excellent written and oral communication skills* Exceptional attention to detail and accuracyStrength Through DiversityThe Mount Sinai Health System believes that diversity is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we're as diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinai's unrivaled record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize medicine together.We work hard to acquire and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where you can develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title or expertise, can make an impact on quality patient care.Explore more about this opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!Who We AreOver 38,000 employees strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.Formed in September 2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospital campuses, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Beth Israel Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St. Luke's, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.The Mount Sinai Health System is an equal opportunity employer. We promote recognition and respect for individual and cultural differences, and we work to make our employees feel valued and appreciated, whatever their race, gender, background, or sexual orientation.EOE Minorities/Women/Disabled/Veterans,Job Type: Officer of Administration
Bargaining Unit: N/A
Regular/Temporary: Regular
End Date if Temporary: N/A
Hours Per Week: 35
Salary Range: Commensurate with experience
Position Summary

We are an innovative research entity in the Division of Cardiology looking for a highly organized, detail-oriented and enthusiastic candidate to support the patient-oriented research portfolio of the Center. The Data Analyst will conduct data management activities and analysis for clinical research projects within the Center. The Data Analyst will work in conjunction with the Principal Investigator, other study investigators, and staff to coordinate data management and analysis activities.

Responsibilities

Responsibilities include:
Development of data collection and data entry systems
Running regular data quality assurance checks
Organizing and merging research data from multiple sources
Preparing summary statistics, tables and figures for reports, presentations and publications
Assisting with the interpretation and dissemination of findings in peer-reviewed journals
Coordinating with research staff to ensure the accuracy and efficiency of the data collection and data entry tools and processes
Performing other responsibilities as assigned and requested
Minimum Qualifications
Requires a bachelor's degree or equivalent in education, training and experience, plus two years of related experience.
Preferred Qualifications
Experience with database management (including REDCAP) preferred.
Experience with FileMaker Pro.
Other Requirements
Experience working with large datasets, statistical analysis, and strong working knowledge of advanced SAS and SPSS (or other statistical/database software or other programming language) required.
Well-organized, proactive, extremely organized and detail-oriented with excellent time management skills.
Able to balance working independently and within a multidisciplinary team
Excellent interpersonal, and communication skills.
Able to multitask in a diverse and demanding environment with frequently shifting priorities.
Able to demonstrate flexibility in workload/work hours to meet critical deadlines.
Ability to prioritize multiple projects to ensure the completion of essential tasks.
Must successfully complete systems training requirements.
Equal Opportunity Employer / Disability / Veteran

Columbia University is committed to the hiring of qualified local residents.,ProHEALTH is one of the largest private multi-specialty medical practices in the Northeast and has been serving the health needs of Long Island and the Greater New York Metropolitan area since 1997. With over 900 providers in 300 locations, our goal is to provide quality health care to ensure that our patients get the right care at the right time.

Were a dynamic and growing health care organization, offering a wide range of employment opportunities. We are seeking professional and dedicated individuals to be part of our team, where integrity, compassion, relationships, innovation and performance are among our core principles.

We offer our employees competitive compensation and benefits, flexibility and opportunity for growth and advancement.

As part of our Accountable Care team, we offer a great work environment and the opportunity to work for an organization that is on the cutting edge of healthcare!

Requirements:
• Bachelors degree computer science, mathematics, statistics or economics.
• Proficiency with Microsoft Excel (including macros, vlookup, pivot tables, etc.).
• Ability to work with database management, healthcare informatics software and other computer systems essential.
• 1+ years in healthcare analytics, applying analytic skills to value based programs, preferred
• Experience with Microsoft Access and Excess required;
• Strong organization skills
• Ability to work under pressure, meet expectations and constraints on multiple projects.

In this role, you will have the opportunity to:
• Analyze program performance and elements effecting performance
• Produce dashboards, program reports, and physician performance feedback reports
• Access payor reports and distribute to appropriate team members
• Participate in gaps-in-care analytics process
• Support or direct timely submission of structured clinical data
• Attend interdisciplinary team meetings, including but not limited to AOC, JOC and clinical team meetings with payors.
• Work with Project Manager to meet reporting needs for NCQA programs
• Assist in coordination of medical records and data requests from DSRIP partners
• Support MIPS Promoting Interoperability reporting and any additional reporting as may become necessary to maximize Companys performance in MIPS/APM

ProHEALTH strives to maintain a workplace that accepts and appreciates the differences among our employees. The company will not discriminate against any applicant or employee based on age, race, gender, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital status, covered veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or expression, genetic information, status with respect to public assistance or any other characteristic protected by state, federal, or local law.,Saratoga Medical Center, Inc. Is currently recruiting for a Junior Compensation Analyst to work from our office in Midtown Manhattan. We have been operating clinics, providing occupational health and primary care services to corporate clients and individual patients in the Washington DC area since 1985. Saratoga also has provided the Federal Government with medical staffing services throughout the United States. This project employs the full range of health specialists: nurses, physicians, nurse practitioners, wellness/fitness specialists, emergency medical technicians, dietitians, and medical support personnel. We are a women and minority owned professional services firm, with over 400 medical workers employed at military and private facilities throughout the U.S.

Junior Compensation Analyst Job Responsibilities
Review job descriptions, conduct salary research, make appropriate salary recommendations and complete price proposals.
Establish and maintain a salary survey database
Update th eperformance dashboard in a timely manner
Generate and distribute round-up report (daily snapshot of business activities) on daily basis.
Prepare and complete monthly and annual reports as directed
Perform in-depth research in clinical labor markets across the states Monitor federal, state and local compensation laws and policies to ensure company compliance
Partner with recruiters to provide appropriate guidance regarding compensation and benefits
Partner with HR department to provide appropriate guidance regarding contract renewals
Serve as liaison between contract management team and other departments to address compensation-related issues or requests
Perform any other compensation-related tasks

Bachelor's degree or equivalent experience, preferably in Human Resources, Accounting, or other Business related fields. Proficiency in Excel required.
Saratoga Medical Center, Inc. is an equal opportunity employer and will not discriminate in recruiting, hiring, training, promotion, transfer, discharge, compensation or any other term or condition of employment on the basis of race, religion, color, age (over age 39), sex, national origin, or on the basis of disability if the employee can perform the essential functions of the job, with a reasonable accommodation if necessary.,Strength Through Diversity

Ground breaking science. Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.

The Data Analyst II leads and performs activities related to database management, maintenance of data integrity and security, and basic statistical analyses. The IBD Research Group and the integrated System for IBD daTa Exchange (iSITE) at Mount Sinai is seeking a highly motivated and skilled Data Analyst to join their data analytics team. The position will play a key role with data integration and analytics for their cutting edge research. This position will lead a variety of projects and gain exposure to many productive areas of research, including clinical and translational, genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic research.

The Data Analyst II facilitates and enhances the value of datasets for faculty researchers and other analysts through a range of duties and responsibilities. Such duties include cleaning, creating, and linking datasets large and/or complex data sets.

The Mount Sinai IBD Research Group is one of the international leaders in IBD investigation with a longstanding tradition of major contributions to the field, and the IBD research is supported by one of the leading IBD clinical centers in the world. This position has growth potential for the individual to take on more independence in data analysis and supervision of other research staff.

Roles & Responsibilities:
Translates, merges, cleans, and maps data in large and/or complex data sets
Develop, maintain, implement, and document operating procedures for collection, cleaning, processing, editing, linking, distribution, and flow of data
Design and write custom applications to ensure databases meet requirements throughout data entry, management, and reporting
Identifies, develops, and documents data standardization, data enrichment operations, and data validations
Recognizes recurring issues and analyzes causes in order to generate improvement plans and provides tools/techniques to measure success
Maintains knowledge of the current regulations and technologies related to data management and Implements best practices in data management to ensure the integrity of data and quality of data processes
Deliver analyzable or analyzed data to internal and external stakeholders
Assist faculty and staff with queries, basic statistical analyses, reports and technical difficulties related to data retrieval
Trains staff with varying degrees of knowledge to effectively use the database system
Assist with primary data collection if requested
Interface and coordinate with basic science and translational science collaborators and core facilities for tracking and quality control for bio-sample collections
May access data in the Data Warehouse and other electronic health care system-linked databases, as required
Ability to work independently and to work closely with leadership, supervisors and staff
Uses modeling techniques and tools in analyzing and specifying data structure in large and/or complex data sets
Provide quarterly updates on overall enrollment in established and prospectively enrolling studies
May assist writing and preparing manuscripts, grants and other materials for internal and external audiences
Performs other related duties
Requirements:
Master's degree in public health, epidemiology, or in a social science with a heavy emphasis on quantitative data analysis Or Bachelor's degree in computer science, statistics and/or related field with 3 years of experience
Experience: 3 to 4 years of experience using R (preferred) and python working with large and complicated data sets (e.g., data manipulation, data analysis, or data cleaning), preferably in a
medical or healthcare setting
Experience working with and manipulating a wide range of large biological data sets, including
clinical, genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic data
Demonstrated proficiency with data analysis, visualization, and cleaning using a statistical software package (R, Python)
Working knowledge of Ruby
Demonstrated proficiency working with SQL data bases and coding in SQL
Strength Through Diversity

The Mount Sinai Health System believes that diversity and inclusion is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we're as diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinai's unrivaled record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize healthcare delivery together.

We work hard to recruit and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where you have the opportunity and support to develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title or expertise, have an impact on quality patient care.

Explore more about this opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!

Who We Are

Over 38,000 employees strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.

Formed in September 2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospitals, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St. Luke's, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an equal opportunity employer. We comply with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate, exclude, or treat people differently on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.

EOE Minorities/Women/Disabled/Veterans,The Data Analyst III assists with contract activities specifically related to External Quality Review (EQR) requirements including performance measure validation, performance improvement and data validation projects. They assist in the design of quality improvement studies, conduct quantitative and qualitative data analysis, compile results, and write reports for both technical and lay audiences. In addition, the Data Analyst III is responsible for the implementation of these activities and coordinates the resources needed. The Data Analyst III will also assist in performance measure development including the alignment of these measures with national standards, practice guidelines and/or published best practices. Reports for these studies may require small- and large-scale background research. This individual participates in departmental workgroups to improve the efficiency of review and analysis processes. They must also maintain close communication with the client and participating MCOs for the purposes of providing support and guidance towards the successful completion of these activities. The Data Analyst III plays a key role in coordinating IPRO-MCO quality improvement activities.

QUALIFICATIONS:
Strong communication skills (written and verbal) with the ability to clearly and thoroughly present quantitative and qualitative project findings to interested parties with varying technical backgrounds.
Strong interpersonal skills with the ability to interact effectively with internal and external customers.
Strong analytical skills with the ability to prepare cogent analyses using a variety of statistical, spreadsheet, graphic and database programs.
Ability to handle all stages in the full cycle of a research project.
Strong time management skills with the ability to meet deadlines and client deliverables.
Knowledge of managed care operations, performance measurement and research methods preferred.
Ability to analyze and interpret health care data, e.g., claims, encounters, health records.
Ability to coordinate workgroups to design quality improvement studies and other health care studies.
Ability to work well independently, with minimal supervision, as well as in a team environment.
Strong computer skills in various software packages (Word, Excel, Access and PowerPoint). Willingness to learn new software skills as needed.
EDUCATION & EXPERIENCE:
Bachelor’s degree in an analytical, research or health-related field, required. Master’s degree in public administration, public policy, public health or related social science with course work including both statistical and process analysis, preferred.
A minimum of two (2) years external experience working in a health care field or equivalent experience in a Managed Care department, required.
Significant experience with a variety of software packages, particularly Word, Excel, Access, and PowerPoint. SAS/SPSS and visual analytics tools (e.g., Tableau) experience preferred.
IPRO offers a comprehensive benefits package.

IPRO is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment for without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or protected veteran status,Healthcare Data Analyst - HEDIS

VillageCare is looking for a self-motivated Data Analyst, with a strong MLTC and HEDIS background who will support the Quality and Data at VillageCareMAX. The Data Analyst will provide information and analytical insight to drive business decisions, utilizing AWS redshift and SQL to implement performance and quality improvements.

We would like to speak to those who have a Bachelor's degree in relevant field, seeking those who bring 3-5+ years of experience in Healthcare analytics. The ability to run complex queries, manipulates, transform, and generate reports using SQL, MS Excel, and BI tools. Experience with MLTC or HEDIS will be vital to this position.

There are many benefits to working for VillageCare. If you are someone who likes being part of a team, enjoys highly competitive compensation and benefits package, a 403(b) retirement plan and much more than we would love to speak with you! VillageCare offers a wide range of at-home and community-based services, as well as managed long-term care options that seek to match each individual's needs to help them attain and maintain the greatest level of independent living possible. We are committed to superior outcomes in quality health care.VillageCare is a Drug-free workplace. Equal Opportunity Employer.

Job Posted by ApplicantPro,Look for more than answers.At Quest, we are on a continuous journey of discovery and development. Its this attitude that has made us an industry leader and the #1 Diagnostic Lab in the US. For those joining us, we offer exciting and fast-moving career opportunities where you can affect change at a rate unheard of in many organizations of our size and scope. While we invest in and develop technology to drive our innovations, our ongoing success relies on our people.

As a Senior Data Quality Analyst, you will work for the world leader in the industry, with a career where you will have the opportunity to collaborate and affect change while expanding your leadership skills and technical knowledge. You can make a real impact in a market that is growing and developing.

Senior Data Quality Analyst, the role:

The Senior Data Quality Analyst provides data analysis expertise for the Data Governance program and is expected to have extensive knowledge of Quest applications and data. This professional supports the Enterprise Data Managers (EDM) in their support of our governed data domains, and serves as a Lead for our Data Quality Analyst team, representing Data Governance in meetings, discussions and by providing informative presentations. The Senior Data Quality Analyst must be able to work independently and apply technical and domain expertise to suggest and, upon approval, execute enhancements and improvements to serve the data governance program.

Job responsibilities:

• Data investigation, root cause analysis, data profiling and data lineage activities
• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
• Build graphs, charts, animations, reports and presentations to clearly show data quality, and insights from data
• Support the development, maintain/monitor data quality rules, data standards and Governance policies
• Work with Data Governance Technical resources to develop and maintain Business Glossary Definitions, Metadata Definitions and Data Lineage
• Drive assigned corrective action to resolve identified data quality problems
• Lead and coordinate offshore Data Quality Analyst team members in methodologies, principles, practices, and tools as assigned
• Provide expertise in the implementation of the Data Governance toolset
• Support special project work as dictated by the Director and Enterprise Data Managers
• Provide support for Data Governance initiatives

To qualify, the ideal candidate will have the following skills and experience:

• 4+ years of experience working in a data analyst or similar role
• 3+ years of experience with Quest internal systems is preferred
• BS/BA in relevant field of study, or more experience may be used in lieu of degree
• Strong SQL, Visio and database skills; i.e. MS Access
• Proficient Metric / Report design and development, preferred
• Strong Analytical skills and the ability to identify trends
• Expertise in creating data quality rules to support governance initiatives
• Comfortable in creatively working with large sets of data
• Expertise in MS Excel, VB, and Tableau Reports
• Strong presentation skills focused on communicating current state driving change management
• Demonstrated leadership skills (project and personal) required
• Ability to communicate effectively with various levels in the organization (written and oral)
• Ability to explain complex or technical processes to someone who has little knowledge of the subject
• Demonstrated ability to understand complex concepts and processes quickly
• Previous clinical laboratory, health care or health related industry experience preferred

Apply Today

Join us for competitive benefits and development opportunities in a progressive and supportive environment. Help us improve our service, and the experiences of our patients and colleagues. Work with us and together we can be better.

Your Quest career. Seek it out.

All requirements are subject to possible modifications to reasonably accommodate individuals with disabilities. Quest Diagnostics is an Equal Opportunity Employer: Women / Minorities / Veterans / Disabled / Sexual Orientation / Gender Identity or Citizenship.

Job Requirements:,Family Health Centers at NYU Langone, a designated Level 3 Medical Home, is the largest federally qualified health center network in New York State, and the second largest in the nation. It includes nine primary care sites, 33 school-based health centers and dental clinics, four day care centers, the nation’s largest dental residency program, and New York State’s largest behavioral health program. The network also includes 12 community medicine sites providing care to disenfranchised New Yorkers, comprehensive HIV services, chemical dependency programs, and a family support center that offers educational, vocational, and other social support programs. Learn more about Family Health Centers at NYU Langone.

Position Summary:
We have an exciting opportunity to join our team as a Sr Data Analyst.

Senior Data Analyst will provide leadership for the Data Analyst team, assuring a consistent focus on data tracking, program performance measurement and quality assurance for the Department of Community-based Programs.

Job Responsibilities:
Manage Efforts to Outcomes (ETO), the primary client service database and reporting system used by LFHCs community-based programs, including standard and custom features
Manage daily activities of departmental Data Analyst(s) and related Data staff, including daily assignments, supervision, and training.
Synthesize and summarize data as needed for funding reports and internal use.
Design custom data collection methods and reporting structures in collaboration with program management
Support and maintain the use of databases and IT systems required by funders, including supervising data entry, reviewing data reports, and troubleshooting.
Assist in the transition of new programs into using ETO, including workflow design, development of custom data entry and assessment tools, and report writing
Assist in management and troubleshooting for programs using in-house (Excel and/or Access) database systems
Run and perform quality assurance for monthly reports submitted to a variety of public and private funders
Provide basic technology support and training to staff and develop and deliver trainings as needed
Act as an internal champion and resource with respect to the database and technology tools available to staff, building buy-in for efficient use of those tools, and identifying creative ways to help staff do their jobs more effectively using relevant technology.
Minimum Qualifications:
To qualify you must have a Bachelors degree. Masters preferred. 2+years.

Preferred Qualifications:
Interest in working with programs that serve vulnerable populations, and a desire to facilitate improved client outcomes through workflow design and program evaluation
High level ability in MS Excel and Access, and ability to learn and adapt new software quickly are a must
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills with the ability to work collaboratively as part of an interdisciplinary team
Experience with programming (e.g. VBA, SQL), writing queries, and/or business intelligence reports in data warehouses (e.g. SAP, BusinessObjects Suite, Tableau)
Prior experience with web-based CRM (client relationship management) system, especially Efforts to Outcomes
Experience with writing queries for relational database software (such as SQL)
Familiarity with EPIC a plus
Some experience or knowledge of statistics and statistical software packages

Qualified candidates must be able to effectively communicate with all levels of the organization.

Family Health Centers at NYU Langone’s network provides its staff with far more than just a place to work. Rather, we are an institution you can be proud of, an institution where you’ll feel good about devoting your time and your talents.

NYU Langone Hospital-Brooklyn is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer committed to diversity and inclusion in all aspects of recruiting and employment. All qualified individuals are encouraged to apply and will receive consideration without regard to race, color, gender, gender identity or expression, sex, sexual orientation, transgender status, gender dysphoria, national origin, age, religion, disability, military and veteran status, marital or parental status, citizenship status, genetic information or any other factor which cannot lawfully be used as a basis for an employment decision. We require applications to be completed online.

If you wish to view Family Health Centers at NYU Langone’s EEO policies, please click here. Please click here to view the Federal “EEO is the law” poster or visit https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/ofccpost.htm for more information. To view the Pay Transparency Notice, please click here.,Strength Through Diversity

Ground breaking science. Advancing medicine. Healing made personal.

Job Title: Data Science Analyst II - Mount Sinai Health Partners
Background
Mount Sinai is one of the largest non-profit health systems in the
U.S. with a strong reputation for quality of care and research/education. Our
health system has ~40,000 employees working together to provide billions of
dollars in high-quality care for millions of patients each year.

We are accelerating a transition to a business model focused on
population health management – our goal is to keep entire communities healthy
and out of the hospital. Mount Sinai
Health Partners (MSHP), the population health division of the Mount Sinai Health
System and the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, located in the New
York Metropolitan area and ranked 5th in Fast Company’s “Top 10 Most
Innovative Companies in Big Data” is the team driving this transformation
within Mount Sinai. The team includes
400 employees with clinical, contracting, finance, IT, analytics,
operations, and product development expertise.

Mount Sinai Health Partners is realizing this new objective in two
ways. First, we engage in value-based
contracts with health plans. Using
analytical insights, we deploy our clinical programs to improve the health of
attributed populations and maximize customer value. Second, we have created a
team to assemble our clinical and population health assets into product
offerings (e.g., care bundles, worksite health centers, insurance products in
partnership with health plans), and sell them to individuals and employers
via multiple channels.

MSHP is a fast growing business unit within Mount Sinai and is
looking for team members who:

Are comfortable “playing up” and “playing down” as needed to
accomplish business objectives
Work productively amidst ambiguity
Thrive in fast-paced work
environments
Seek to improve the status quo
Within MSHP, the Analytics (Clinical Informatics) team is a
thoughtful and diverse group of data science analysts that have important
functional roles throughout our business. Using analytical insights, we
deploy our clinical programs to improve the health of attributed populations
and maximize customer value. We work hand and hand with the larger clinical
and operational team stakeholders and support their efforts. The team blends
past experiences from health plans, health systems and public health roles
with cutting edge data analytics and machine learning capabilities to deliver
exceptional and unique value to our broader business. The frontier ahead
includes exciting new tools and data science projects along with
transformational business initiatives in a supportive environment and
continuous learning culture.
Role Summary
The Data Science Analyst II collaborates with stakeholders from
across the organization to develop sophisticated analytics to provide
information, insights and BI (Business Intelligence) solutions that
contribute to sound strategic planning, decision-making, goal setting, and
effective performance measurement.
The Data Science Analyst II demonstrates sound and a more advanced
understanding of the healthcare domain, technical data manipulation and
analytic development skills and impact the patient community of the Mount
Sinai Health System.

Responsibilities
Analyzes data requests using information technology, enrollment,
claims, pharmacy, clinical, contract, medical management, financial,
administrative and other corporate data from both modeled and disparate
internal and external sources.
Works with departmental staff to identify requirements for reporting
and / or business intelligence tools.
Identifies necessary data, data sources and methodologies.
Collects, organizes, integrates, analyzes and interprets data.
Leverages advanced statistical analysis methods to create insightful
recommendations and conclusions that may be communicated to the stakeholder.
Identifies and addresses expected and unforeseen data complexities to
mitigate their impact on the analytic outcome and associated business
decisions. Works to improve data quality where possible within created
analytical models. Feeds data quality issues back to IT or identified data
stewards to facilitate creation of high quality metrics.
Develops and may present reports, analyses and findings to senior
management and others as scheduled or requested.
Responsible for one or more of the following stakeholder groups:
Contracting and Commercialization – May assist in the modeling and
forecasting contract scenarios, measuring ongoing performance and identify
trends in performance to inform our clinical or contracting staff to improve
contract outcomes.
Care Management – Helps to identify, understand and prioritize
at-risk members in need of care management.
Helps stratify our membership to optimally use resources to focus on
the patients most in need, currently or in the future.
Medical Directors – Helps to identify utilization trends and
variations across the different categories of health care services to assist
the Medical Directors to focus their efforts to maximize contract performance
and clinical effectiveness.
Quality and Documentation – Helps to link payer quality and
documentation opportunities into operational analytic processes to maximize
our quality scores, top line revenue and optimize the use of resources in
concert with MS Health System contracts.
I.T. / High Performance Computing in any ongoing projects.
Takes a proactive role as liaison/analyst for internal stakeholders,
understands their needs and translates them into reporting and analytic
solutions.
Effectively communicates with stakeholders and customers and ensures
all requests are properly triaged, recorded and tracked.
Adheres to corporate standards for performance metrics, data
collection, data integrity, query design, and reporting format to ensure high
quality, meaningful analytic output.
Helps identify and understand data from internal and external sources
for competitive, scenario and performance analyses, and financial modeling to
gain member/provider insight into new and existing processes and business
opportunities.
Works closely with IT on the ongoing improvement of Mount Sinai’s
integrated data warehouse, driven by strategic and business needs, and designed
to ensure data and reporting consistency throughout the organization.
Develops and maintains project work plans, including critical tasks,
milestones, timelines, interdependencies and contingencies. Tracks and reports progress. Keeps stakeholders apprised of project
status and implications for completion.
Provides technical support to data analytics functions as they relate
to varied business units, and technical expertise on the selection,
development and implementation of various reporting and BI tools tied to
business unit reporting requirements. Creates new BI reports and interactive
dashboards as required.
Prepares clear, well-organized project-specific documentation,
including, at a minimum, analytic methods used, key decision points and caveats,
with sufficient detail to support comprehension and replication.
Ensures customers are adequately trained to use self-service BI tools
and dashboards.
Mentors level I Analysts, and teaches others within the organization
on how to a) define meaningful process and performance measures, b) develop
BI queries, and c) generate and use management reports effectively.
Shares development and process knowledge with other analysts in order
to assure redundancy and continuously builds a core of analytical strength
within the organization.
Demonstrates advanced level proficiency with the principles and
methodologies of process improvement. Applies these in the execution of
responsibilities in support of a process focused approach.
Other duties as assigned

Qualifications
Education and Experience
BA or BS degree minimum, in a relevant field of study; Masters degree preferred.
5 years minimum in analytics development expertise, preferably in
health care, or for a health provider, health plan or accountable care
organization with working knowledge including either:
A health care EMR such as
Epic/Clarity, aCW, etc.; a payor claims system such as Facets, Amisys, etc.;
or a hospital/provider system such as IDX, Soarian, etc.
Additional Skills and Qualities
Knowledge of the New York State Medicaid and CMS Medicare regulations
and related reporting requirements, such as STARS,QARR, MMCOR, MEDS, RAPS and
HEDIS is a strong plus.
Experience working in a health plan or consulting actuarial,
financial reporting or medical economics departments highly valuable.
Experience as a nurse informaticist highly valuable.
Experience working in healthcare provider analytics related to
revenue modeling, managed care contracting, population management, case
management, clinical or financial decision report
PhD, MD or DO program may be substituted for three years of
experience.

Strength Through Diversity

The Mount Sinai Health System believes that diversity and inclusion is a driver for excellence. We share a common devotion to delivering exceptional patient care. Yet we’re as diverse as the city we call home- culturally, ethically, in outlook and lifestyle. When you join us, you become a part of Mount Sinai’s unrivaled record of achievement, education and advancement as we revolutionize healthcare delivery together.

We work hard to recruit and retain the best people, and to create a welcoming, nurturing work environment where you have the opportunity and support to develop professionally. We share the belief that all employees, regardless of job title or expertise, have an impact on quality patient care.

Explore more about this opportunity and how you can help us write a new chapter in our story!

Who We Are

Over 38,000 employees strong, the mission of the Mount Sinai Health System is to provide compassionate patient care with seamless coordination and to advance medicine through unrivaled education, research, and outreach in the many diverse communities we serve.

Formed in September 2013, The Mount Sinai Health System combines the excellence of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai with seven premier hospitals, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai Brooklyn, The Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai Queens, Mount Sinai West (formerly Mount Sinai Roosevelt), Mount Sinai St. Luke’s, and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an equal opportunity employer. We comply with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate, exclude, or treat people differently on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.

EOE Minorities/Women/Disabled/Veterans,Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people s lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Minimum Years of Experience: 5

Sub Specialties: Business Analyst- Associate,QA Production Data Analyst


Job Ref: 53295
Category: Quality Assurance
Department: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Location:

160 Water St. #3, New York, NY
Job Type: Regular
Employment Type: Full-Time
Hire In Rate: $70,000.00
Salary Range: $70,000.00 - $70,000.00
Marketing Statement
MetroPlus Health Plan provides the highest quality healthcare services to residents of Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens and Staten Island through a comprehensive list of products, including, but not limited to, New York State Medicaid Managed Care, Medicare, Child Health Plus, Exchange, Partnership in Care, MetroPlus Gold, Essential Plan, etc. As a wholly-owned subsidiary of NYC Health + Hospitals, the largest public health system in the United States, MetroPlus’ network includes over 27,000 primary care providers, specialists and participating clinics. For more than 30 years, MetroPlus has been committed to building strong relationships with its members and providers to enable New Yorkers to live their healthiest life.

Position Overview

Assess systems with a highly analytical approach, along with a problem-solving ability to determine, recommend and implement solutions regarding systems, databases and process efficiencies
Job Description
Ability to analyze and troubleshoot Production issues in and Microsoft Office including Access and iSeries/AS400;
Perform all applicable QA on every production job processed;
Analyze data in which the information will be presented, distributed, and accessed;
Create and maintain customized queries, batch scripts and data extracts as required;
Work with Operational areas to achieve mutual data and technical needs. Adhere to mandated response times as outlined in the MetroPlus policies and procedures;
Interact with Production staff, vendors, IT developers and MetroPlus business areas to troubleshoot and correct system/data problems;
Provide recommendations to supervisor to improve system/application performance;
Identify any potential quality issues per defined process and escalate potential quality issues immediately to management;
Ensure the quality of the processes meet the specifications and requirements;
Maintain up to date documentation on parameters for successful execution of these production processes;
Maintain up to date operation status logs and data repositories related to Production QA;
Implement vendor board/off-boarding
Minimum Qualifications
A Baccalaureate Degree from an accredited college or university; and
Five (5) years of progressive, responsible experience in the field of data processing, computer systems and applications;
Previous healthcare related work setting is preferable;
Knowledge and understanding of HIPAA;
Knowledge and expertise in the characteristics of computers, peripheral devices, communications systems and hardware capabilities, programming languages, IT applications, systems analysis methodology, data management and retrieval techniques; or a satisfactory equivalent combination of training, education and experience.
Professional Competencies
Three (3) to (5) five years’ experience with system design;
Strong knowledge of Microsoft Access;
Quality Assurance experience;
Background in data analysis;
Knowledge of Managed Health Care Systems;
Excellent verbal and written communication skills;
Excellent analytical ability;
Excellent customer services, interpersonal and time management skills;
Knowledge of MS SQL is a plus;
Knowledge of Batch scripting is a plus;
Ability to learn new software tools.,Senior Healthcare Data Analyst

New York, NY

Are you a rock star healthcare data analyst who excels at solving challenging data problems and answering hard questions?

Do you share our passion for enabling positive change within healthcare and helping patients with chronic conditions like diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease and mental health?

If so, you could be a perfect fit for our team of like-minded professionals who share a common mission and passion for helping others and a desire to build a great company.

Cecelia Health is a high-growth, venture-backed health tech services company based in New York City. Our customers are health plans, pharmaceutical & device companies, and self-insured employers who we work with to deliver personalized, technology-enabled coaching to transform the lives and health outcomes of their members, patients and employees. Cecelia Health is a high-energy, results-oriented work place that believes our success, as well as the success of our customers and patients, relies primarily on a fantastic team with the passion, drive and skills to change the face of chronic condition management.

Cecelia Health seeks to hire a Senior Healthcare Data Analyst to be based in the companys midtown location in New York City and report to our VP of Data & Strategy. The Senior Healthcare Data Analyst directly supports Cecelia Healths customer, operational and thought leadership needs by developing and designing standardized and customized analytics that support value based financial contracts, population health management, quality outcomes, performance targets, and identification of potential areas for improvement.

Who You Are:

You are naturally curious, a strategic thinker and an effective communicator. We expect you to be well-versed in producing and interpreting custom and routine data analytics using membership, claims, provider, prescription drug and quality data from a variety of sources. You have high-accountability and can effectively work with various company stakeholders and make an impact across the company. If you are passionate about telling stories with data and welcome the challenge of answering vexing questions, we would love to meet you.

Responsibilities:
Analyze, understand, interpret and explain complex membership, clinical, quality outcome and performance data in support of customer, sales marketing and market needs
Complete assigned customer analytic projects by evaluating data requirements, designing analytics studies and delivering reports and results to customers and management
Effectively identify, understand and communicate customer analytics and reporting business requirements
Effectively communicate analytic findings with customers and management
Support customer Analytic Platform training and day to day support needs
Perform routine data quality review and continuous quality improvement initiatives
Proactively mine customer-specific utilization, financial and clinical quality performance data trends to identify opportunities for enhanced analytics, clinical quality improvements and/or cost savings
Provide recommendations for cost and clinical performance improvement to internal management and customers
Participate in continuous product improvement initiatives by identifying opportunities to improve customer analytics, dashboards and data platforms
Requirements:
Bachelor's degree required in health care related, informatics, statistics or mathematics related disciplines
Minimum of 5 years of direct experience in health care analytics field
In-depth knowledge of health insurance based provider billing, medical and pharmacy coding schemes, claims payment process, and claims, clinical, quality and eligibility data characteristics
Working knowledge of relational database structures, data quality issues and health care and pharmacy payer data elements
Deep experience using Tableau and open source reporting packages
Excellent verbal, written and presentation communication skills
Strong analytic and problem solving skills
Self-motivated, intellectually curious, open learner
Master degree in healthcare or informatics (preferred)
Were a young and rapidly growing Healthcare Technology company - if you have ever wanted to jump on a rocket ship as its taking off, now is your chance.

Powered by JazzHR,The Data Analyst III supports the Medicaid Health Care Assessment Program by assisting in the analysis of Medicaid Special Projects, acquiring and analyzing data, and preparing reports. In this role you will also coordinate the design of software applications to enhance project quality and productivity; supports and enhances data analysis activities through database programming and statistical analysis. Duties include but are not limited to: Synthesize input from workgroup members to design data collection tools, sampling strategies, work instructions, and data reports that meet internal and external customer needs. Develop, implement and maintain programs to extract information from various databases, analyze inter-rater reliability, calculate recurring statistics, and convert results into appropriate format for the department special project database(s) or reports. Serve as a SAS programming resource. Analyze statistical and epidemiological patterns of the data and provide written analyses reports

QUALIFICATIONS:
Strong analytical skills with the ability to prepare cogent analysis and reports using a variety of statistical, spreadsheet, and database programs, including but not limited to SAS, MS-Access, SQL.
Ability to clearly present qualitative and quantitative review/analysis findings to interested parties with various backgrounds.
Ability to handle all aspects in the full cycle of research projects.
Ability to work well independently and with moderate supervision.
Ability to relate well with technical and non-technical staff.
EDUCATION & EXPERIENCE:
Master’s degree in Health, Statistics, Computer Science, or a related field, required.
Two (2) years' experience in health or similar research and/or evaluation that involved extensive use of SAS and Access in data transformation, management and analysis, required or Advanced SAS Certification.
IPRO offers competitive salaries, comprehensive health and dental coverage.

IPRO is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or protected veteran status,Data Analyst - Cardiac Cath Lab

Req #: 0000048995
Category: Nursing
Status: Full-Time
Shift: Day
Facility: RWJBarnabas Health Corporate Services
Location:
Cardiac Surgery Admin,

95 Old Short Hills Road, West Orange, NJ 07052

Job Summary:

The Cardiac Cath Lab Data Coordinator is primarily responsible for abstracting data from the electronic medical record and using proprietary software to enter data into specific cardiac registries. The candidate must be detail oriented, committed to high quality data abstraction, meet quality and productivity standards, function well independently and work well under time constraints to ensure deadlines are met.

Essential Functions:
Tracks and validates data accuracy and timeliness in accordance with specific registries.
Performs quality assurance tasks such as inter rater reliability (IRR) and validation tasks through audits as assigned.
Knowledge base must remain current regarding all registry updates and definitions including, but not limited to glossary specifications changes and additions.
The individual will be an integral part of the Cardiac Cath team attending meetings as required and participating on committees as needed.
Leveraging data abstraction and registries will assist in driving performance improvement efforts and reduce variation.
This individual will serve as an educational resource and subject matter expert to the professional staff, which will improve their understanding of required data required by registries.
Job Requirements:
Must be an Registered Nurse licensed in New Jersey with 3 years of recent Cath Lab experience.
Knowledge of cardiac anatomy and disease process is preferred.
Basic computer skills, that include the navigation of several electronic databases (Cerner, Allscripts, Epic, Excel, Lumedx, MERGE).
Excellent communication skills is a must serving as an educational resource on the Cardiac Cath registry for internal and external audiences as needed.
Ability to work remotely several days a week but travel to specific hospitals is required.
Hours are flexible.
Other Duties:

Please note this job description is not designed to cover or contain a comprehensive listing of activities, duties or responsibilities that are required of the employee for this job. Duties, responsibilities and activities may change at any time with or without notice.

Additional Information:
We offer a great work environment, competitive rates and excellent benefits, including:

Medical/Dental/Vision plans

401 (k)

Vacation/Personal/Holiday/Sick Time Off

Short & Long Term Disability

Basic Life & Accidental Death Insurance

Tuition Reimbursement

Health Care/Dependent Care Flexible Spending Accounts

RWJBarnabas Health is the most comprehensive health care delivery system in New Jersey and the state s second largest private employer with more than 32,000 employees, 9,000 physicians and 1,000 residents and interns. The system includes eleven acute care hospitals, three acute care children s hospitals and a leading pediatric rehabilitation hospital (Children s Specialized Hospital).

RWJBarnabas Health is an Equal Opportunity Employer,Position Summary:

Analyst responsible for creating and maintaining interfaces between data sources and application systems using industry standard techniques and software. Additional responsibilities include (but are not limited to): Reconciling discrepancies between data sources; using industry standard reporting tools with databases such as SQL Server.

Responsibilities

Essential Job Functions:
1. Analyze incoming requests, gather business requirements, create specification documentation and implement systems solutions, such as, but not limited to the following:
a.System interfaces
b. File transfers
c. Report development from databases and data warehouses.
d. SQL Server programming to support interfaces, file transfers and reporting needs.
2. Liaison with vendors of data sources and application systems to ensure that interfaces and file transfer requirements are maintained.
3. Work as part of a team of a technical team to define and implement technical solutions to business requirements.



Qualifications
Minimum Requirements:

Education: BA/BS degree in Information Systems or equivalent IT experience
Skills & Trainings: At least three (3) years of various facets of SQL development experience including the use of ETL tools such as Microsoft SSIS and standard reporting tools such as Microsoft SSRS or SAP Crystal Reports.

Knowledge:

1. ETL process using industry standard software.

2. SQL Development techniques using an using industry standard database such as SQL Server or Oracle.

3. Database reporting process using industry standard reporting tools.

4. Excellent verbal and written communication skills

5. Must be able to participate in meetings with all levels of management within the organization

6. Detail oriented, excellent follow up,Position Overview

The Senior Billing Data Analyst is responsible in assisting the Billing Manager in designing policies and
procedures, implementing and creating new billing reports, setting the requirements with our billing
consultant to develop reports to more accurately and timely bill and collect Medicaid billings on a weekly
basis from eMedNY. Collections from the state will be managed and compared to the billed amounts and
all denials will be resolved and managed appropriately according to State guidelines and criteria. Efficient
and effective use of Microsoft Access and Excel is a requirement for the Senior Billing Data Analyst.
The Senior Billing Data Analyst will also assist with creating adhoc billing files for State and member direct
billing monthly, ensuring compliance with all state and federal regulations, as well as organization
policies. The adhoc billing pertains to members who do not have Medicaid and the services billed for are
Willowbrook Case Services, Willowbrook Service Coordination, State Paid Care Management, and Early
Intervention.
In addition, the Senior Billing Data Analyst is responsible for creating Access databases, adhoc reports,
policies and procedures for all assigned tasks, and streamline reporting processes.
It is critical that the Senior Billing Data Analyst understand, demonstrate in their performance, and lead
the department to ensure that:
 Individuals and families are at the center of all we do.
 We work for individuals and families.
 We value what individuals and families have to say.
 We are focused on outcomes that meet individual needs.
 We will be strong advocates and protect individuals’ rights.

Duties and Responsibilities

 Ensure the timely and accurate generation of all Billing related reporting, consistency and
standardization amongst the various types of reports and databases and manage the various
reporting tools utilized by CDNY and reconcile complex reports to multiple data sources to
validate reporting accuracy and completeness.
 Ensure through analyses and analytic review that only the following state allowed services are
billed: Comprehensive Care Management, Care Coordination and Health promotion, transitional
care from inpatient settings including follow-up, individual and family support, referral to
community and social support services, and the use of HIT to link services.
 Develop efficiencies to consolidate and increase the effectiveness of outbound file development
and reconciliation, and maintain departmental reports used internally.
 Reconciles all cash paid by the state and members to amounts billed and resolves all
denials/nonpayment to maximize collections. Develops ad hoc reports as needed.
 Develop, analyze and reconcile the output of complex queries using diverse reporting tools.
 Maintain current knowledge of regulations, data files, and their structures and associated
database tables in the IT systems.
 Foster appropriate internal relationships with key partners to successfully monitor Care
Management Services are entered correctly and timely into the Medisked system.
 Assists Billing Manager in installation and monitoring of billing and collection internal controls.
Maintain confidentiality, protect privacy, comply with Protected Health Information regulations,
and report violations immediately.
 J.Complete other duties as directed by the Billing Manager.
 This description of duties and responsibilities is intended to indicate the kind of tasks required of the
position. It does not limit or exclude other duties not mentioned here but required for the successful
completion of the job.

Required Qualifications & Experience

Bachelor's Degree in Accounting or Finance is preferred.
Advance Microsoft Access and Excel is required.
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills is required.
SQL query design experience and skills preferred.
A minimum of three years of Medicaid billing, collections, and analysis.,Data Management Analyst II

Job no:

Work type: Staff Full-Time

Location: Alachua

Categories: Administrative/Professional, Business/Accounting/Finance, Research/Scientific/Grants

Department: - PHHP-COM BIOSTATISTICS

Classification Title:
Data Management Analyst II

Job Description:
1) Manage data file systems from clinical trials and biospecimen banks that include multiple data sets. Initiate data quality checks for the assigned clinical trials. Develop programs for the selection of patient cohorts from COG clinical trials with specified inclusion criteria for approved correlative biology projects requiring biospecimens from the COG biobank in Columbus, Ohio; send deidentified patient data to the biobank for sample selection and shipping. Follow instructions from the clinical investigators and complete the biobank-related tasks with a high level of independence Conduct statistical analyses correlating the results from the biology assays with clinical data from the COG trials.
2) Conduct requested ad hoc analyses and prepare summary reports for the trial committee applying a good understanding of the design and analytic plan in assigned trial protocols; with minimal supervision from the lead study statistician (faculty) and; understand, and implement the protocol-specified interim monitoring and final analytic plan based on an outline provided by the study statistician. Interpret results for assigned clinical trials by employing knowledge of various statistical data analyses methodologies including survival analysis, cox regression analysis, logistic regression and tests of association. Prepare draft semi-annual study progress reports and confidential data safety monitoring committee reports using existing templates for study chair and statistician.
3) Review and study the assigned clinical trials, and the data collection case report forms developed for each. Programmatically conduct regular checks on the trial data, identify data inconsistencies, and work with the study Research Coordinator to resolve the data issues with participating sites.
4) Collaborate with study committees and study statisticians on abstracts and presentations at national and international conferences, and manuscript submissions to peer-reviewed journals; prepare summary reports of requested analyses including interpretation of results, prepare tables and presentation quality figures for conferences and inclusion in manuscripts.
5) Work with COG Industry liaisons to prepare trial datasets for transfer to industry collaborators to help with regulatory submissions to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA).

Expected Salary:
$64,000 - $70,000 annually, commensurate with qualifications and experience

Minimum Requirements:
Master's degree in an appropriate area; or a bachelor's degree in an appropriate area and two years of relevant experience.

Preferred Qualifications:
1) A master's degree in Statistics, Biostatistics or a related field
2) Diverse skills in data management, programming, and statistical methods
3) SAS and R experience essential additional programming/software experience preferred (e.g.
Stata, MS Office)
4) Ability to work with supervisors and other personnel in BERD
5) Ability to analyze problems and make sound judgments

Special Instructions to Applicants:
In order to be considered, you must upload your cover letter and resume.
Application must be submitted by 11:55 p.m. (ET) of the posting end date.
This is a time-limited position.
The University of Florida is an equal opportunity institution dedicated to building a broadly diverse and inclusive faculty and staff.

Health Assessment Required:No

Advertised: 12 Jun 2020 Eastern Daylight Time

Applications close: 22 Jun 2020 Eastern Daylight Time,IT Analyst III - Data Systems

Job no:

Work type: Staff Full-Time

Location: Main Campus (Gainesville, FL)

Categories: Engineering/Computer Science, Information Systems/Technology, Library/Physical/Social Science, Research/Scientific/Grants

Department: - INSTITUTE-CHILD HEALTH POLICY

Classification Title:IT Analyst III

Job Description:

The Department of Health Outcomes and Biomedical Informatics (HOBI) participates in multiple Medicaid funded or related projects. Supporting State quality initiatives and conducting policy research using Medicaid and other health data sources.
The incumbent in this position is part of a data management team responsible for data warehousing, management and analysis. They will design and manage data systems that include multi-sourced health, healthcare system, and social or population data sets. Data storage systems include SQL Server, and SAS. Management, access, and analytic tools also include Tableau, MySQL, Access, Python, R, ArcGIS, and others
Responsibilities include:
Design and manage data file systems from multiple research projects that include multiple data sets using a variety of database and statistical software tools, for example, SQL and SAS. Optimize transformation and transfer of data between projects and platforms. Provide expertise and communicate recommendations on data structures and appropriate use to project leadership. Interact effectively with internal and external data sharing partners.
Enhance data summary and reporting using various software tools such as SQL, SAS, Tableau, and application development tools. Suggest best practices for data and design improvements. Assist project leadership in representing information through data visualization and appropriate summarization.
Conduct data analyses using specifically designed healthcare data software, or other statistical software or programming tools such as SQL , Python, R, etc. Participate in interpretation of results. Provide statistical or data science expertise to project leadership, or other research staff.
Assist in development and maintenance of software applications used in project implementation and reporting. Perform user testing. Advise project coordinators on application planning and deployment. Assist with software audits.
Expected Salary:
$75,000 - $82,000

Minimum Requirements:
Bachelor's degree in an appropriate area and two years of relevant experience; or a high school diploma or equivalent and six years of experience. Appropriate college coursework or vocational/technical training may substitute at an equivalent rate for the required experience

Preferred Qualifications:

Proficiency with statistics commonly applied in public health and clinical research
One year experience in health care research or data management, including administrative data analysis
Diverse skills in data management, programming, and statistical methods; ability and experience working with a number of software packages (e.g., SQL, Tableau)
Expertise in communicating complex data and analyses to lay or industry partners and stakeholders, in project development and reporting
Ability to work independently, with initiative, manage time and work with minimal supervision to analyze problems and take appropriate action to complete projects.

Special Instructions to Applicants:
In order to be considered, you must upload your cover letter and resume.
This is a time-limited position.
If an accommodation due to a disability is needed to apply for this position, please call or the Florida Relay System at (TDD). Hiring is contingent upon eligibility to work in the US. Searches are conducted in accordance with Florida's Sunshine Law.
This requisition has been reposted. Previous applicants are still under consideration and need not apply.
Application must be submitted by 11:55 p.m. (ET) of the posting end date.

Health Assessment Required:No

Advertised: 18 Jun 2020 Eastern Daylight Time

Applications close: 02 Jul 2020 Eastern Daylight Time,Grow your career at Cedars-Sinai!
Come join us and find out why Cedars-Sinai has been ranked as one of the top 100 best places to work in IT as ranked by 2017 Computerworld Magazine!
Summary:
Leads the analysis and design process for database applications and reports.
Serves as a primary liaison between users and EIS, and is able to translate user requests and processes into detailed functional and technical specifications and project plans.
Works in conjunction with business analysts, application developers, and engineers on very complex projects.
Responsibilities include development of report guidelines and formats, policies, procedures, and documentation.
Reviews and modifies database analysts' specifications and other documents.
Creates and maintains metadata and BI presentation Layer.

Experience: Typically requires 8 years experience with business analysis or data warehouse solutions
Educational Requirements: Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science or related field; equivalent combination of education and work experience is acceptable.

What else are we looking for?
Experience working with EPIC preferred
Strong analytics skills
SQL experience
Experience at a healthcare system

License/Certification/Registration Requirements: N/A

Physical Demands:
Computer work

#LI-EIS
#Jobs-Indeed,PRACTICE OVERVIEW
Radiology Partners is the largest and fastest growing on-site radiology practice in the US. We are an innovative practice focused on transforming how radiologists provide consistently exceptional services to hospitals, imaging centers, referring physicians and patients. With our state-of-the art clinical technology, specialized expertise, access to capital, and retention of top physician talent, Radiology Partners reliably exceeds the expectations of our clients, patients, and partners. We serve our clients with an operational focus, and, above all, a commitment to quality patient care. Our mission is To Transform Radiology.

POSITION SUMMARY
Radiology Partners is looking for a passionate Data Analyst to help build and update database driven and Excel based models within the areas of revenue recognition, and financial planning and analysis. A central business goal of the finance team is to move manual business processes to an automated framework. The candidate will work closely with a team with two Sr. Financials Analysts and a Director of Finance and be part of the broader RP Finance team.

They will need to have a strong command of SQL and the Microsoft Office suite, and have a working knowledge of Python or adjacent languages. Experience with Tableau development or Django a plus. They additionally need to have experience taking unstructured objectives, independently making assumptions, and delivering actionable analysis. The ideal candidate will possess strong technical skills and business acumen while having a high capacitive to learn independently.

POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Revenue recognition-
o Help to develop new automated process
o Validate data integrity from RP-wide Data Mart as it relates to the Finance team
o Assist with development of visualization tools
o Load ancillary data to Finance data server
o Assist in implementing monthly changes to model inputs
o In the short-term, use our legacy Excel based revenue recognition process to drive revenue recognition for a small portion of the business
Financial planning & analysis-
o Revenue forecasting & budgeting
o Ad hoc Excel based model updates
o Transition legacy business processes to automated environments
General-
o Monthly preliminary review of variances to plan or recent trend
o Building queries and analytical pipelines to automate analyses and reporting
o Interpreting data and analyzing results using statistical techniques

DESIRED PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE
Undergraduate degree in Business Analytics, STEM, Quantitative Social Science discipline, Information Management, Data Science, or related qualified major
Passion for solving business problems with data
Proven working experience working in an analytical capacity developing insights and making recommendations
Experience using data access tools and building visualizations using large datasets and multiple data sources
Ability to learn and assimilate technical information quickly
Very focused attention to detail and accuracy
Proficiency in Microsoft Office, SQL and Python
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS:
2+ years of client-facing/consulting preferably in Data Analysis
2+ years of SQL (Oracle, Vertica, Hive, etc.) or relational database experience (Oracle, MySQL)
1+ year of experience with packages such as Python or Tableau
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets
Adept at queries, report writing, and presenting findings
CCPA Notice: When you submit a job application or resume, you are providing the Practice with the following categories of personal information that the Practice will use for the purpose of evaluating your candidacy for employment: (1) Personal Identifiers; and (2) Education and Employment History.

Job Type: Full-time

Benefits:
401(k)
Dental Insurance
Disability Insurance
Flexible Spending Account
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Paid Time Off
Parental Leave
Relocation Assistance
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Company's website:
https://www.radpartners.com/,Due to the dynamic situation regarding COVID-19, you may experience a delay in the application process for certain positions. While we will continue to accept applications during this time, we ask for your patience and understanding regarding this matter. The health and safety of our employees and community remains our highest priority during this unprecedented time.

Data and Reporting Analyst

Make a Difference in People's Lives While Expanding Your Knowledge and Skills

Diverse Role ● Excellent Training ● Career Options ● Great Culture

Didi Hirsch Mental Health Services has been a leading provider of community mental health and substance use services since 1942. With a history stretching back to the Great Depression, Didi Hirsch has established a strong reputation in the communities we serve. We help more than 90,000 children and adults each year from ten locations and 100 schools throughout Los Angeles and Orange County. We are committed to excellence, diversity and opportunity. We are dedicated and enthusiastic individuals who make a difference in the lives of the clients we serve. We offer a competitive salary along with a full benefits package.

Summary

The Data and Reporting Analyst will have extensive knowledge working with data warehouses and various internal data sources to develop highly compelling visualizations and detailed elements for dashboards, Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), reports and other deliverables using Microsoft SQL Server Reporting Services and Microsoft PowerBI or similar programs. This position will provide data related technical support for the Quality and Innovations Division and lead the analysis and design process for database applications and reports. An ideal candidate must be self-motivated, focused on quality, detail-oriented, and possess the ability to meet strict deadlines. They should also have good communication skills and be able to collaborate effectively with multiple departments, including IT, Research and Evaluation, Quality Improvement, and Clinical Operations.

Primary Duties
Mine, extract and utilize appropriate data from the data warehouse and various internal data sources on a regular and ad-hoc basis that assist in identifying and monitoring areas such as clinical outcomes, quality of care issues, clinical management of clients, and quality assurance.
Support quality improvement projects and initiatives through regular and ad-hoc data extracts, reporting, and analytics.
Evaluate, recommends, implements and maintains reporting and analytical tools that measures quality and performance as well as drive informed decisions.
Monitor the quality of data and investigate and resolve/reconcile data inconsistencies to ensure data integrity. Drive continuous improvement efforts to optimize processes and ensure accuracy and completeness of data and reports.
Design metrics, reports and dashboards that help management better understand the data, monitor business health, and access data insights.
Collaborate across multiple departments (e.g. IT, Clinical Operations, etc.) to understand business needs, analyze complex data, provide advance data analysis and reporting, and clearly communicate recommendations.
Manage the full lifecycle of assigned projects, including research, data mining, data analytics, design, development, testing, implementation, and documentation.
Discuss business reporting requirements with stakeholders. Conduct in-depth interviews with subject matter experts to fully understand the requirements and document business needs and convert them to technical specifications.
Presents complicated analytical information in a concise and compelling manner to technical and non-technical audiences.
Track issues with reports, including defects in object logic, schema logic, data quality problems and process errors. Understand complete reporting lifecycle to diagnose problems.
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets to help define new process improvement projects and opportunities.
Secondary Duties:
Performs related duties as requested.
Supervisory Responsibility

The employee in this position has no supervisory responsibility.

Environment/Working Conditions

The employee in this position:
Strives to be flexible and adapts to change.
Responds resourcefully to new demands and challenges.
Works effectively with and without distraction.
Maintains a constructive and positive outlook.
Physical Activity

In the course of performing this work, the employee in this position:
Will spend time sitting, standing, walking, reaching, speaking, and listening.
Must regularly lift and/or move up to 10 pounds, and may occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds.
Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions of the job.

Equipment Operation

The employee in is this position may operate any/all of the following equipment:
Telephone/fax machine.
Computer, printer and related equipment.
Copy machine.
Adding Machine/calculator.
Audio /visual equipment.
Computer software may include any or all of the following:
Microsoft Office including Word, Excel, Access, PowerPoint.
MSSQL Server 2008 R2, SQL Server.
Microsoft PowerBI or similar programs.
Business Objects, Crystal Reports, plus other reporting and business intelligence platforms.
Electronic Health Record System.
Other software as necessary.
Requirements
Degree in Computer Science, Statistics, Data Science, Business or other quantitative field is preferred.
Minimum of 2 years of hands on experience with Microsoft SQL Server and 2 years of experience with use of data warehousing tools.
Documented experience using Microsoft PowerBI, Microsoft SQL Server, SSRS, or other enterprise-level databases and reporting tools.
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy.
In-depth understanding of data management (e.g. permissions, recovery, security and monitoring).
Strong project management, organization, communication (verbal and written) and problem-solving skills with the ability to prioritize assignments and meet required deadlines.
Ability to communicate technical information to non-technical audiences clearly.
Ability to adapt to changing needs by acquiring new skills and knowledge.
Ability to work independently as well as part of a team.
Ability to work in a face-paced environment with changing priorities by being flexible, collaborative, responsive, and adaptable.
The employee in this position must be able to perform this job safely, without endangering the health or safety of him/herself or others.
HIPAA Privacy Standards Compliance

The employee in this position will:
Not use or disclose protected health information about any member or other party in compliance with Didi Hirsch’s policies related to state or federal laws such as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
Use appropriate safeguards to protect the confidentiality of such information.
Report to Didi Hirsch management any use or disclosure of protected health information not permitted by Didi Hirsch policies related to state or federal laws such as HIPAA.
Participate in Didi Hirsch’s training or briefings on HIPAA information as scheduled.
Consult with supervisor on any issues or questions about compliance under Didi Hirsch’s policies related to state or federal laws such as HIPAA.,Grow your career at Cedars-Sinai!


Come join us and find out why Cedars-Sinai has been ranked as one of the top 100 best places to work in IT as ranked by 2018 Computerworld Magazine for the 10th year in a row!
The Enterprise Information Services (EIS) team at Cedars-Sinai understands that true clinical transformation and the optimization of a clinical information systems implementation is fueled through the alignment of the right people, processes and technologies.

What will you be doing in this role?
Triage intake of data requests and seek understanding of business need.
Applies knowledge of healthcare and critical thinking skills in the analysis of business request and makes recommendations for solution/s to solve challenges.
Provides complex to highly complex report and data analysis with the help of more senior team members, vendors, and/or other EIS department contacts.
May mentor or provide guidance to less experienced staff.
Participates in re-engineering, as needed, operational work-flow processes with end-users/business owners.
Fills in on various work/projects in the absence of the Team Lead.
Provides subject matter expertise and training to end-users and staff as needed.
May participate in interviews and onboarding process.
Able to set and achieve deadlines for self and teammates.
Demonstrates leadership and urgency to other project team members.
Meets all deadlines. Timely turnaround on issues and tasks.
Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers.
Assists the team with identifying cross-functional and integrated project risks.
Demonstrates leadership to get the job done on time and above expectations.
Leads assigned projects. Must demonstrate an advanced understanding of project management methodologies and components of project lifecycle.
Demonstrates quality of project management.
Independently manages medium to large scale and complex projects.
Leads and evaluates process and requirements analysis, including process mapping though current flow charts, documents, future needs/plans, requirement elicitation, stakeholder analysis, and specification gathering on complex projects.
In addition, using current and projected data, provides recommendations.
Leads and evaluates process and requirements analysis, including process mapping though current flow charts, documents, future needs/plans, requirement elicitation, stakeholder analysis, and specification gathering on complex projects.
In addition, using current and projected data, provides recommendations.

Education:
Bachelor's Degree; minimum.
Master's Degree; preferred.
Experience:
Data Analyst and/or Business Analyst, including facilitation of performance improvement projects and/or quantitative analysis/reporting of quality and efficiency measurements.
Experience in health care delivery setting.
Strong Experience working with healthcare information management systems and/or clinical operations.
Demonstrated experience with project management.
Excellent experience in Microsoft Office including working knowledge of spreadsheets, presentation, and word processing.
Experience with analytic business intelligence tools such as Crystal, Business Objects, SAS, and Tableau.
Experience with project level reporting activities for successful go-lives.
License/Certification Requirements:
EPIC Certification.,Grow your career at Cedars-Sinai!
Come join us and find out why
Cedars-Sinai has been ranked as one of the top 100 best places to work in IT as
ranked by 2018 Computerworld Magazine for the 10th year in a row!
The Enterprise Information Services (EIS) team at Cedars-Sinai understands that
true clinical transformation and the optimization of a clinical information
systems implementation is fueled through the alignment of the right people,
processes and technologies.

What will I be doing in this role?
The Data Intelligence Analyst II works with end-user requests to document moderately to complex business requirements, data definitions, business rules, and data quality requirement in support of enterprise data intelligence projects. Creates specifications for reports and analysis based on business/clinical needs and data elements required or available. Produces data sets, reports, ad-hoc requests, dashboards, etc. Conducts data analysis in support of a variety of analytic solutions. Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers. Analyzes complex problems and issues using data from internal and external sources. May provide consultation to users and lead cross-functional teams to address data and analytic issues. Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers. Analyzes complex problems and issues using data from internal and external sources. May provide consultation to users and lead cross-functional teams to address data and analytic issues.

Job Responsibilities:
Triages intake of data requests and seeks understanding of business need.
Applies knowledge of healthcare and critical thinking skills in the analysis of business request and makes recommendations for solution/s to solve challenges.
Provides moderately complex to complex report and data analysis with the help of more senior team members, vendors, and/or other EIS department contacts.
Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers.
Works closely with application teams to understand workflow, documentation standards and potential gaps. Makes recommendations for closing gaps.
Gathers clear and concise requirements for basic to medium complexity requests, interprets the findings and translates the information into a documented business specification for report development.
Documents specifications in an organized manner, demonstrate knowledge of understanding request, tools that can be applied and developed to present to the requestor.
Works closely with report developers (including Enterprise Data Warehouse and other reporting teams)to ensure understanding of data models and design of output.
Performs data scrubbing, troubleshooting and quality checking prior to delivery of results.
Demonstrates collaboration across application areas and work groups. Must demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.
Proactively communicates with project management to prioritize workload and potential risks or delays. Tracks issues and provides solution-oriented escalation to project leadership.
May be independently responsible for completing tasks/assignments depending on size of project, including status reporting, requirement gathering, project scoping, vendor research, project planning, documentation, resources planning, and impact analysis. Demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.
Manages low to medium complexity projects. Collaborates with team members as needed.
Performs working level process and requirement analysis, including process mapping though current flow charts, documents, future needs/plans, requirement elicitation, stakeholder analysis, and specification gathering in support of team projects and small/medium managed projects.
Demonstrates a strong understanding of report analysis and development, and applies expertise to help meet customer goals and outcomes.
Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers.
May be independently responsible for completing tasks/assignments depending on size of project, including but not limited to status reporting, requirement gathering, project scoping, vendor research, project planning, documentation, resources planning, and impact analysis. Must demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.
Manages low to medium complexity projects. Collaborates with team members as needed.
Demonstrates a strong understanding of report analysis and development and applies expertise to help meet customer goals and outcomes.
Trains end-users and staff as necessary.
Develops to demonstrate a strong understanding of build concepts, Epic migration paths, change control process/governance and ticket management process.
May serve as the central point of contact for smaller/medium complex projects. May independently work with external vendors in support of team projects, as well as resolving new issues, and coordinating patches/upgrades within assigned areas.
Demonstrates collaboration across project borders with other teams. Thinks outside the box and proposes practical solutions to issues. Provides oversight and project management to assigned tasks.
May contribute to strategy discussions by identifying options with associated pros and cons with team member.
Teamwork/Customer Relation Responsibilities:
Collaborates to problem solve and make decisions to achieve desired outcomes
Establishes effective working relationships with cross-functional team(s)
Cultivates and maintains strong customer relationships and rapport with stakeholders and/or client groups

Education:

Bachelor's Degree

Experience:
3 years Experience working with healthcare information management systems and/or clinical operations experience.
Some project management experience.
Experience writing SQL statements and accessing relational database system.
Excellent experience in Microsoft Office including working knowledge of spreadsheets, presentation, and word processing.
Experience with analytic business intelligence tools such as Crystal, Business Objects, SAS, and Tableau.
3 years Epic certified in relevant module/s.
Strong technical proficiency in Reporting Workbench and Radar build.
Able to independently analyze basic to moderately complex Clarity report requests, Reporting Workbench and Radar build requests with assistance if needed.
EPIC Certification Required,AMAZING INDIVIDUALS WORKING FOR POSITIVE PEOPLE at AIDS Healthcare Foundation!
Does the idea of doing something that really makes a difference in people’s lives while being well-compensated intrigue you? Are you looking to work for an organization that encourages growth and success from each and every one of its employees?
If so, AIDS Healthcare Foundation is the place for you!
Founded in 1987, AIDS Healthcare Foundation is the largest specialized provider of HIV/AIDS medical care in the nation. Our mission is to provide cutting edge medicine and advocacy, regardless of ability to pay. Through our healthcare centers, pharmacies, health plan, research and other activities, AHF provides access to the latest HIV treatments for all who need them.
AHF’s core values are to be:
• Patient-Centered
• Value Employees
• Respect for Diversity
• Nimble
• Fight for What’s Right
STILL INTERESTED? Please continue!

Housed in Human Resources, but reporting to Contracts Administration, The Ryan White Analyst contributes to AHF's mission by assisting is a cross-functional capacity to meet the administrative needs and demands of AHF Ryan White contracts.
Under the joint guidance and direction of the Contracts Administration, Grants, HR, Payroll and IT departments, in this role you will be responsible for compiling, collecting, organizing, analyzing and disseminating required documentation and information needed for programmatic, administrative and financial reporting, invoicing, grant solicitations, and audits/site visits. Such documentation includes, but is not limited to payroll support, time and effort reporting, clinical and financial data to support expenditures and/or program goals. In this position, you will also query data, download files from county systems, import data, produce reports and articulate/explain results, issues and exceptions as they arise.
As a Ryan White Analyst, you will use your technical abilities to successfully navigate different systems that inform grant/contract related needs and assist with any direct or indirect grant and contract functions.
As a team member based in Los Angeles, you will work closely with staff across the country to ensure a full and comprehensive system is in place that allows for continuity, when applicable, across programs.
This role adds value to AHF and the Contracts Department by assisting and contributing to an evolving grants contract management infrastructure.,Are you passionate about helping people? Do you want to make a difference in people's lives?


We embrace a culture of passion and dedication at Cedars-Sinai, and it’s part of the reason we’ve been named one of the top ten hospitals in America’s Best Hospitals by U.S. News & World Report. Now we invite you to join us. From working with a team of exceptional healthcare professionals to using state-of-the-art facilities, you’ll have everything you need to do something incredible—for yourself, and for others.

Do you work well in a large team environment where critical thinking is essential?

Summary of Essential Duties:

Demonstrate a high level of business acumen and Collaboration skills across multiple teams to understand business needs, analyze complex data, and clearly communicate recommendations. Develop requirements for data-related projects and work with the data team to see projects from start to finish.

Develop highly compelling visualizations and detailed elements for dashboards, KPIs, reports and other deliverables in SQL, Tableau, Crystal Reports, OTBI, BI Publisher, OBIEE and set the trend in the reporting not following status quo.

Discusses business reporting requirements with stakeholders. Conduct in-depth interviews with subject matter experts to fully understand the requirements and document business needs and convert them to technical specifications.
Provides data related technical support for business analyses by mining extracting and utilizing appropriate data from the data warehouse and various internal source systems through repositories and data marts/cubes on a regular and ad-hoc basis that assist in but is not limited to identifying and supporting quality improvement projects and initiatives, identifying and measuring outcomes to drive organizational efficiencies.
Track issues with reports, including defects in object logic, schema logic, data quality problems and process errors. Understand complete reporting lifecycle to diagnose problems and escalate issues or barriers to success timely and appropriately
Formats data extracted from data warehouse into user friendly presentations complete with definitions and explanations of collection methods.

Provide accurate work estimates and ensures optimal performance and follows best practice.
Enables and mentors the Core HR (HRIS) team to promote and make data-driven decisions, backed by investigation and collaboration through data. Also, mentors jr analysts on development of reports, dashboards, KIP’s etc.
Providing day-to-day Core HR (HRIS) functional/technical support to end-users, including data systems integrity, troubleshooting, and analyzing errors in reports.
Incumbent will be assisting with HCM future state reporting needs/analysis/testing.

Experience:
5+ Years Advanced knowledge/experience with Microsoft office, Statistical Software Programs and related reporting tools - Business Objects, OBIEE, BI Reporting, Crystal Reports, Tableau Tools.

6+ Years Advanced knowledge/experience with DB/SQL (all facets of the SQL Server Services group: Database Services, reporting services (SSRS), Integration Services (SSIS) and Analysis Services (SSAS)), SQL Developer, and relational databases and query/report writing. ETL, SFTP and Oracle SQL experience required.

5+ Years Experience with Lawson HR/Payroll, PeopleSoft and/or Cloud Technologies (i.e., Oracle HCM Cloud, Workday, SAP etc.) and have worked in the Healthcare and Human Resources arena.
5+ Years familiarity with functional HR systems processes, Data Warehousing and Data architecture experience. Demonstrate advanced understanding of the data warehouse discipline, including data lakes, data mapping, data mining, data dependencies, structured and unstructured data, SQL, and ETL. X

Educational Requirements:

Bachelor's in Computer Science or equivalent; with some course work in database management.

#Jobs-HERC,Data Analyst I

Job Category:

Information Technology

Department:

Population Health Management

Location:

Los Angeles, CA, US, 90017

#job-location.job-location-inline {
display: inline;
}

Position Type:

Full Time

Requisition ID:

5984

Established in 1997, L.A. Care Health Plan is an independent public agency created by the state of California to provide health coverage to low-income Los Angeles County residents. We are the nation’s largest publicly operated health plan. Serving more than 2 million members in five health plans, we make sure our members get the right care at the right place at the right time.

Mission: L.A. Care’s mission is to provide access to quality health care for Los Angeles County's vulnerable and low-income communities and residents and to support the safety net required to achieve that purpose.
Job Summary
The Data Analyst I supports quality and process improvement activities by producing healthcare outcome measurements that are used for internal and external reporting, the tasks including data quality assurance, process programming, specification documentation and report developing. The position applies technical skills to design, develop, and generate ad hoc or production reports that may evolve into complex data analysis/data integration projects that this position may be responsible for maintaining. The complex data analysis/integration projects are those which may require periodic maintenance on a weekly, monthly, quarterly, biannual, or annual basis. The position works with Information Systems analysts when ongoing reports can be accurately transferred for production.

The position interprets and documents both written and verbal specifications. The position takes basic instructions or specifications and interviews the client for complete details sufficient for writing data queries based for ad hoc and ongoing health care measures. The position must comprehend the relationships between the field elements in encounters and claims, membership, and provider databases. Must be able to apply and/or develop technical specifications for health care measures such as those used by NCQA HEDIS and CDC. Must demonstrate appropriate SAS skills in developing programs and procedures for analytics and quality assurance. Working knowledge of basic to medium SAS programming skills are highly preferred.

The Data Analyst I is a key resource to the HOA department on application use. The position supports the functions related to quality improvement activities inclusive of quarterly reports that demonstrate health care outcomes in comparison to targets or national averages/percentiles published by recognized organizations such as NCQA and CDC.
Duties
Investigate and document organizational data flow and sources.
Provide thorough documentation regarding current 1) data sources 2) data flow 3) current process and procedures to code, group, QC, link and seed the data.

Develop SAS procedures to create, maintain, QC the clinical data schema/data warehouse.

Develop analytical programs, databases, routine procedures using SAS programming language.

Design, develop, and generate ad hoc/production reports.

Maintains complex ongoing data projects. Produce accurate analysis as allowed by resources. Identifies and creates work-arounds to create valid results that meet the intent of the client's specifications. Produces periodic results as scheduled.

Communicate with stakeholders/clients/collaborators regarding project details and plans.

Educate/Tutor clients on maintenance/usage of database/solutions designed.

Perform other duties as assigned.
Education Required
Associate's Degree
In lieu of degree, equivalent education and/or experience may be considered.
Education Preferred
Bachelor's Degree in Information Systems or Statistics
Experience
Required:
A minimum of 4 Years of demonstrated ability to use relational databases for the purpose of generating ad hoc reports.

Preferred:
Previous experience with report generation using health care data with focus on elements from encounter/claims, membership, and provider data.

At least two years work experience in health plan.

Past work with membership, provider, and claims encounter/claims.

Demonstrated ability to take responsibility for making sure requested projects meet the client's needs with respect to data accuracy, format, and timeliness.
Skills
Required:
Basic SAS programming skills.

Able to apply critical thinking in evaluating priorities/solutions.

Analytic skills include the ability to identify data aberrations and recognize data patterns that impact quality.

Must be able to present data in a format that is appropriate for analysis. This includes the ability to determine select the correct information for calculating basic rates, table configuration, and graphical presentations.

Must demonstrate an aptitude in learning and expanding abilities to use new applications with basic training.

Must be a self-starter and multi-tasked who takes charge of projects assigned.

Must be able to make recommendations to the clients that demonstrate strengths and limitations of the organization's ability to meet the request.

Working knowledge of MS Access, Excel, and Word software.

The ability to work well in a team setting with positions having professional backgrounds in the technical and/or clinical fields.

Must demonstrate the ability to work independently and seek solutions proactively.

Persuasion Skills: In a situation where discrepancy occurs between two sets of queries, the data analyst should be able to review both sets of queries and explain which set is accurate and why. Errors found in reference databases need to be referred up to IS for correction. The analyst must convince the appropriate party why the error must be corrected.

Preferred:
Medium SAS programming skills.
Licenses/Certifications Required
Licenses/Certifications Preferred
Project Management Professional (PMP)
Required Training
Additional Information

L.A. Care offers a wide range of benefits including
Paid Time Off (PTO)
Tuition Reimbursement
Retirement Plans
Medical, Dental and Vision
Wellness Program
Volunteer Time Off (VTO)

Nearest Major Market: Los Angeles
Job Segment:
Medical, Claims, Public Health, Healthcare, Insurance,Under the general direction of the Research Core Manager and the Principal Investigator(s), your primary responsibility is the day-to-day administration of large translational research grant(s). You will assists with many tasks including scheduling meetings, communications, financial report preparation, purchasing, reimbursement, travel, and coordination of seed grants and developmental funds and will be the day-to-day liaison for projects and committees, other related on and off-campus agencies and institutions and administrators serving as a liaison for project investigators, collaborations, and committee members and responsible for communication and consultation with project(s) program officer(s) and staff. You will ensure proper compliance, maintenance of all associated research files. including minority inclusion policy monitoring. Working with the department fund management team, the incumbent ensures budget reporting compliance according to project timelines.

Job Title: Epidemiologist Data Analyst-Urology

UC Job Title: PUBL ADMNST ANL

Job Number: req7087

Work Hours: M-F; 8AM-5PM; Hours May Vary

Job Type: career

Duration: Indef

Work Location:Los Angeles

Salary Range: 23.04 - 45.54

Job Duties:

Under the general direction of the Research Core Manager and the Principal Investigator(s), your primary responsibility is the day-to-day administration of large translational research grant(s). You will assists with many tasks including scheduling meetings, communications, financial report preparation, purchasing, reimbursement, travel, and coordination of seed grants and developmental funds and will be the day-to-day liaison for projects and committees, other related on and off-campus agencies and institutions and administrators serving as a liaison for project investigators, collaborations, and committee members and responsible for communication and consultation with project(s) program officer(s) and staff. You will ensure proper compliance, maintenance of all associated research files. including minority inclusion policy monitoring. Working with the department fund management team, the incumbent ensures budget reporting compliance according to project timelines.

Job Qualifications:
Demonstrated strong writing skills.
Demonstrated ability to develop long-range strategic planning and operationalize according to grant mandates.
Demonstrated ability to organize, initiate and work independently to address responsibilities; must have strong time management skills and ability to independently prioritize tasks and re-prioritize work based on knowledge of research objectives.
Skill in handling sensitive or confidential matters with discretion.
Analytical skills to analyze information, practices and procedures, formulate logical and objective conclusions, and make recommendations for effective solutions.
Excellent interpersonal, oral, and written communication skills; ability to effectively and clearly communicate research goals, participant's obligations, benefits and limits to study participation in terms understood by participants; ability to discuss sensitive health and emotional matters; and ability to communicate effectively with medical, nursing and administrative personnel and regulatory.
Demonstrated ability to interact effectively with culturally diverse population (cultural, socio-economic status, educational, cognitive) in order to efficiently establish rapport and cooperative, collaborative working relationships.
Demonstrated ability to work with persons with highly sensitive health issues.
Demonstrated ability to establish and maintain a cooperative working relationship with co-workers, faculty, research staff, students, and community contacts and collaborate effectively as a team.
Bachelor’s degree in a health science field, such as biology, nursing, public health, etc. strongly preferred
Master’s in health science field, such as biology, nursing, public health, etc. preferred
Knowledge of basic science related cancer treatment.
Demonstrated ability to maintain confidentiality.
Experience developing, monitoring, and implementing office systems and procedures to ensure a smooth and effective operation.
Knowledge of prostate cancer treatment and treatment-related side effects.
Ability to work a flexible schedule in order to meet changing priorities.
Familiarity with medical terminology.
Skill in event planning, both on-campus and off-campus


Bargaining Unit: 99

Layoff Referral Deadline: 3/17/2020

Posted Date: 3/2/2020

Posting Category: Research,Overview

You can find the cures you know are out there. At UCLA Health, you make it happen as part of a groundbreaking Research team, working to understand hundreds of medical disorders and improving processes for dozens of procedures across the globe.

Job Duties
Job Qualifications

Job Duties

Responsibilities

Under the general direction of the Research Core Manager and the Principal Investigator(s), your primary responsibility is the day-to-day administration of large translational research grant(s). You will assists with many tasks including scheduling meetings, communications, financial report preparation, purchasing, reimbursement, travel, and coordination of seed grants and developmental funds and will be the day-to-day liaison for projects and committees, other related on and off-campus agencies and institutions and administrators serving as a liaison for project investigators, collaborations, and committee members and responsible for communication and consultation with project(s) program officer(s) and staff. You will ensure proper compliance, maintenance of all associated research files. including minority inclusion policy monitoring. Working with the department fund management team, the incumbent ensures budget reporting compliance according to project timelines.


UCLA is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or protected Veteran status.


Job Qualifications

Qualifications
Demonstrated strong writing skills.
Demonstrated ability to develop long-range strategic planning and operationalize according to grant mandates.
Demonstrated ability to organize, initiate and work independently to address responsibilities; must have strong time management skills and ability to independently prioritize tasks and re-prioritize work based on knowledge of research objectives.
Skill in handling sensitive or confidential matters with discretion.
Analytical skills to analyze information, practices and procedures, formulate logical and objective conclusions, and make recommendations for effective solutions.
Excellent interpersonal, oral, and written communication skills; ability to effectively and clearly communicate research goals, participant’s obligations, benefits and limits to study participation in terms understood by participants; ability to discuss sensitive health and emotional matters; and ability to communicate effectively with medical, nursing and administrative personnel and regulatory.
Demonstrated ability to interact effectively with culturally diverse population (cultural, socio-economic status, educational, cognitive) in order to efficiently establish rapport and cooperative, collaborative working relationships.
Demonstrated ability to work with persons with highly sensitive health issues.
Demonstrated ability to establish and maintain a cooperative working relationship with co-workers, faculty, research staff, students, and community contacts and collaborate effectively as a team.
Bachelor’s degree in a health science field, such as biology, nursing, public health, etc. strongly preferred
Master’s in health science field, such as biology, nursing, public health, etc. preferred
Knowledge of basic science related cancer treatment.
Demonstrated ability to maintain confidentiality.
Experience developing, monitoring, and implementing office systems and procedures to ensure a smooth and effective operation.
Knowledge of prostate cancer treatment and treatment-related side effects.
Ability to work a flexible schedule in order to meet changing priorities.
Familiarity with medical terminology.
Skill in event planning, both on-campus and off-campus

Summary Information

Posting Category:
Research

Work Location:
US – Los Angeles, CA

UCLA Title: PUBL ADMNST ANL

Job #: 7087

Work Hours:
M-F; 8AM-5PM; Hours May Vary

Job Type: career

Duration: Indef

Salary Range:
$23.04 – $45.54 Hourly

Layoff Referral Deadline:
3/17/2020

Bargaining Unit:
99

Posted Date:
March 2, 2020,By
joining the team that is designing and implementing Kaiser Permanente Bernard
J. Tyson School of Medicine, you will have the opportunity of a lifetime to
create a medical school that will educate physicians for the 21st century and
beyond and be a catalyst for change in medical education. The School of
Medicine team works from an interdependent model of practice and we are looking
for someone who thrives in a highly challenging role within a high functioning
team-based environment.

The
Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine is devoted first and
foremost to offering an outstanding, forward-thinking medical education.
Its curriculum is built on the three pillars of Biomedical Science, Clinical
Science, and Health Systems Science. Students will think broadly about the ways
care can be more effective for everyone and learn how to advocate for better
health in homes, school, workplaces, neighborhoods, and society at large. The
school will incorporate many of the most innovative and effective educational
practices available today and will give students the opportunity to learn from
the physicians and care teams in Kaiser Permanente-s integrated health care
system. This approach will provide future physicians with the knowledge
and skills to play key roles in the transformation of healthcare in our nation
and help people from all backgrounds and settings thrive. Learn more at
medschool.kp.org
The Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, Office of Research and Scholarship (ORS), Research Senior Data Analyst is responsible for making strategic data-related decisions by evaluating complex data processing, management, tracking and analysis as well as dissemination of their work within a research environment. This position reports to the ORS Research Manager for Research Support Services Team.
The Research Senior Data Analyst oversees the staff who facilitate the data analysis and dissemination for the research and scholarly projects for students and faculty consisting of varying complexity in different areas of health-related research. Students and faculty bear primary responsibility for conducting their own research and scholarship and this team provides appropriate guidance and staff support to enable successful work to be undertaken.
Provide quantitative measurement, data analysis and dissemination expertise for ORS. Responsible for implementing established processes, as well as developing and applying innovative techniques for measuring, analyzing, and reporting on healthcare processes, health outcomes, and health costs.

Essential Responsibilities:
In consultation with the Research Manager, initiates, coordinates, and facilitates analytical projects to meet utility care data analyses, faculty and student client needs and achieve programmatic and organizational objectives.
Facilitates effective communication and collaboration with stakeholders: senior leadership, librarian, statisticians, project managers, data analysts. Work may include collaborating on the development of plans for student and faculty study design and analysis; providing guidance or setting priorities for ongoing programming activities; participating in the review of analytic tables/ results and dissemination.
Based on agreements of the ORS Senior Associate Dean and Research Manager, sets overall project direction to address key utility care analyses objectives and client needs. Assists in the prioritization of projects that compete for limited resources, and the scheduling and sequencing of work across projects to make the best use of utility care analyses resources.
Applies project leadership skills, methodological expertise, and knowledge of KP and external data and analytical resources to determine the scope, design, development, and implementation of utility care analyses projects, including partnerships with regional analytical groups and consultation with Health Plan and Medical Group subject area experts.
Advises the ORS Senior Associate Dean and Research Manager on project staffing decisions. Identifies professional development opportunities for ORS data analytics staff based on project requirements.
Manages and coaches ORS Research Support Services Team - data analytical staff to accomplish project objectives and develop staff capabilities.
Establishes and maintains effective working relationships with both internal and external stakeholders. Engages and sustains support among project participants, faculty and students. Represents the ORS Research Support Services Team data analyses to external partners and clients in communications related to projects.
Advises the Research Manager on technical staff hiring decisions. Responsible for data project related training, supervision, coaching and evaluation of utility data care analyses healthcare data analysts.
Applies analytic knowledge, skills and experience to perform project-related work, complete specific project tasks, and create project deliverables.

Basic Qualifications:
Experience
Minimum seven (7) years of experience in an analytical environment required (w/ master's degree), OR
Minimum two (2) years of experience in an analytical environment required (w/doctoral degree)
Education
Master's degree.
License, Certification, Registration
N/A

Additional Requirements:
Disciplinary training in advanced quantitative measurement methods (mathematics or statistics), ideally in the context of a quantitative social science or health services research.
Prior successful experience managing or coordinating professionals in a complex organizational setting.
Proven leadership skills in project management and consulting. Must exhibit efficiency, collaboration, candor, openness, and results orientation.
Demonstrated effectiveness in written and verbal communication of technical material.
Experience with analysis of large administrative databases and computer intensive statistical analysis (preferably using SAS), multivariate statistical methods, general research methodology.
General knowledge or work experience in one or more of the following areas: disease management, survey design, health status measurement, case-mix or health risk adjustment methods, research methods, actuarial methods, cost- benefits or cost-effectiveness analysis.
Demonstrated ability to effectively design, develop, manage, and coordinate analytical efforts among multiple constituents.
Excellent project management skills, including setting priorities and developing work plans assembling project teams, structuring and executing quantitative analyses, overseeing support staff, and meeting deadlines.
Skills in analytical methods including problem and model formulation, algorithm selection, and development of overall solution strategy.
Creativity, critical thinking, and excellent problem-solving skills.
Outstanding written and verbal communication and effective interpersonal skills.
Demonstrated ability to effectively work directly with senior leadership and to bring high-priority projects to successful results.

Preferred Qualifications:
Minimum seven (7) years of experience in an analytical environment in health care, educational or research preferred.
Knowledge of healthcare industry, especially healthcare analytics preferred.
Familiarity with Kaiser Permanente healthcare system preferred.
Doctoral degree.

Kaiser Permanente is an equal opportunity employer committed to a diverse and inclusive workforce. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), age, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, parental status, ancestry, disability, gender identity, veteran status, genetic information, other distinguishing characteristics of diversity and inclusion, or any other protected status.

External hires must pass a background check/drug screen. Qualified applicants with arrest and/or conviction records will be considered for employment in a manner consistent with federal and state laws, as well as applicable local ordinances, including but not limited to the San Francisco and Los Angeles Fair Chance Ordinances.,**In order to submit your application you must take an assessment test and upload your resume through HireSelect: https://www.ondemandassessment.com/link/index/JB-9EZI3260T?u=1006516**

Prime MSO is a leading medical facility management organization. We own and operate multiple surgical facilities and multiple clinics throughout the greater Los Angeles, Orange County, and South Bay areas, with a corporate office located in the heart of Downtown Glendale, California.

A Data Analyst will retrieve and gather data, organize it and use it to reach meaningful conclusions.

Principle Duties and Responsibilities
Producing Reports - A significant amount of the data analyst’s time will be spent producing and maintaining both internal and client-facing reports. A Successful data analyst understand how to create narratives with data that would be understood by the next decision-maker.
Spotting Patterns - Effective data analysts are able to use data to tell a story. In order to produce a meaningful report, a data analyst first has to be able to see important patterns in the data. At the base level, data is used to find trends and insights that can be used to make recommendations.

3. Collaborating with Others - The wide variety of data analyst roles and responsibilities means you’ll collaborate across many other departments in the organization including marketers, executives, and salespeople. You’ll also likely collaborate closely with those who work in data science like data database developers. Being able to communicate well is important. Your success is dependent on your ability to work with people—the people you are gathering the research questions from, peers you collaborate with to execute the work and the people you deliver the final presentation to.
Collecting Data and Setting Up Infrastructure - Streamlining this data collection is key for data analysts. They work to develop routines that can be automated and easily modified for reuse in other areas. Data Analysts will keep a handful of specialized software and tools in their arsenal to help them accomplish this:
Microsoft Excel
Microsoft SQL
Tableau
Microsoft Power BI
SAS software
Google Analytics
Google Tag Manager
Google AdWords
5. Data Analytics – At its core, data analytics is about answering questions and making decisions. You will be assigned senecios that may require the following types of analytics and it is your responsibility to tailor your work and solution to fit the scenario.
Descriptive analytics answers, “What happened?”
Diagnostic analytics answers, “Why did something happen?”
Predictive analytics answers, “What is likely to happen?”
Prescriptive analytics answers, “What action should be taken?”
Skill Qualifications
Have moderate to strong math and statistical skills
Have a strong business acumen
Have moderate to strong computer science / coding skills
Good ability to Develop key performance indicators
Good ability to Create visualizations of the data
Good ability to Utilize business intelligence and analytics tools
Good ability to Make predictions based on data trends a plus
Good ability to Write code to assist in data analysis a plus
Good ability to Identify trends with machine learning a plus
Experience
Data related work: 2+ years (Preferred)
Excel Knowledge (Required)
SQL Knowledge (Required)
Education
Bachelor's or equivalent experience (Required)
**In order to submit your application you must take an assessment test and upload your resume through HireSelect: https://www.ondemandassessment.com/link/index/JB-9EZI3260T?u=1006516**

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $38,000.00 - $60,000.00 per year

Benefits:
Health Insurance
Parental Leave
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Experience:
Excel: 1 year (Required)
SQL: 1 year (Required)
Data Analysis: 2 years (Preferred)
Education:
Bachelor's (Preferred)
Location:
Glendale, CA 91203 (Preferred),SUMMARY

The Senior Data BI Analyst will be responsible for developing and enhancing existing in-house reports and dashboards that produce automated IPA reports, Health Plan reports and Management reports. The Analyst will work closely with key business users as well as managers to gather and define the reporting and process requirements. The Analyst will be responsible for analyzing the data for completeness and accuracy.

ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

• Creation and Maintenance of Power BI reports, MS SSRS, SSAS, Crystal reports, Excel and other tasks as needed

• Develop and maintain SQL stored procedures, functions, SSIS packages

• Maintain and monitor running jobs in Windows Task Scheduler and SQL Server Agents

• Collaborate with business users to gather and define and document requirements

• Create and update documentation for all technical and business processes

• Collaborate to enhance and develop data warehouse (data marts, OLAP cubes, fact tables and dimension tables)

QUALIFICATIONS

• Minimum two years of experience with:

o MS Office 365 (Power BI, Excel, Access, Power Point, Word, Outlook)

o Data-warehouse concepts (Star Schema, SSAS, and MDX queries)

o Crystal Reports, SSRS, SSIS.

o Programming languages (T-SQL, Python, C#)

o MS SQL Server 2016

• Excellent verbal and communication skills

• Customer service oriented

• Knowledge with EZ-Cap or Health Care related databases preferred

• An understanding of the healthcare Industry (Eligibility, Claims, Cap Revenue, Cap Expense, and Utilization Management) is preferred.

EDUCATION and/or EXPERIENCE

Bachelor's degree or one to two years related experience and/or training; or equivalent combination of education and experience

#zr,POSITION SUMMARY:

As a vital team member of the finance team, the System and Data Analyst will work closely in coordination with the Director of Accounting Systems, in the analyzing contract productivity and in supporting financial reporting needs and processes. The System and Data Analyst will be responsible for reporting units of service data, the development of dashboards and compiling ad-hoc reports utilizing financial and billing information from source records in both Welligent and the data warehouse. This position is responsible for backing up the director of accounting systems.

ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITES:

The system and data analyst responsibilities require the analysis of when and/or how to use various system tools and resources required to maintain a compliant reporting process in addition to the management of finance related tables; templates and reporting tools essential in the production of operational reports. They include, but not limited to:

ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITES:

Reporting Structure Requirements
• Partnering with clinical and information technology resources, manage the configuration of:
o Accounting/payroll/contract related data tables
o Risk assessment of productivity revenue; actual, budget and targets
o Analyzes and reports on budget vs actual data variances
• Develops technical solutions to business processes
o Identifies, creates and implements management dashboard reports and tests and analyzes post-implementation.
• Communicates with and trains the finance and clinical team on new processes to ensure understanding.
• Analyzes impact and testing of all new system functionalities affecting accounting functions. To include, but not limited to analyzing post-implementation results of system changes.
• Analyzes all system issues impacting the accounting department and identifies root cause of issue, identifying options for their resolve and implementing solution.
• Reviews current processes and recommends areas of productivity and/or potential risk.

Operational Reporting
• Develops and maintains operational reports using Welligent data.
o Compiles summary data of billings, labor cost, fixed and variable costs, etc., both for current and historical data.
• Creates and/or maintains BI reports and procedures in support of accounting functions.
• Maintains reporting spec sheets and report library
• Analyzes processed data to ensure accuracy
• Provide back-up the director of accounting systems.
• Handles confidential information with sensitivity and good judgment.
• Work in a collaborative team environment.
• Reports to work on time and maintains reliable and regular attendance.
• Models Pacific clinics’ approach, mission and core values in all communication and correspondence.
• Communicates effectively in a culturally competent and diverse consumer population and promotes favorable interaction with managers, co-workers and others.
• Performs other duties as assigned.

QUALIFICATIONS/SKILLS:

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required.

ORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS/INTERACTION:

Initiate and maintain professional interactions and communication with Clinic’s employees and/or others.

EDUCATION and/or EXPERIENCE/POSITION REQUIREMENTS:

• B.A. degree in information systems, business, accounting, finance or related discipline.
• 3 to 5 years of data base programing experience.
• Proficiency with MS SQL Server and Microsoft Access
• Proficiency in the use of Microsoft products with the ability to write macros in EXCEL.
• Proficiency with Business Intelligence reporting tools such as SSRS, Power BI, etc.
• Experience writing intuitive procedures on system processes.
• Project management skills and experience.
• Excellent analytical skills.
• Knowledgeable of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and the ability to construct financial statements.
• Strong organizational skills with focused attention to accuracy and detail.
• Excellent communication and interpersonal skills.
• Works under tight timelines while maintaining professional demeanor.
• Must possess a valid California driver's license and maintain an insurable driving record under the Clinics' liability policy.

PHYSICAL DEMANDS:

While performing the duties of this job the employee is frequently required to stand or sit. The employee is required to use hands to produce records and/or documentation in manual or electronic format. The employee must regularly lift and/or move up to 5 pounds and occasionally move or lift up to 10 pounds.

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job.

WORK ENVIRONMENT:

The work environment characteristics described here are representative of those an employee encounters while performing the essential functions of this job.

While performing the duties of this job, the employee is occasionally exposed to moving mechanical parts and outside weather conditions. The noise level in the work environment is usually moderate. Local business travel is required.

Requirements
Experience writing intuitive procedures on system processes.
Three (3) to five (5) years experience in data base programing.,Providence is calling a Senior Clinical Data Analyst (Per diem/as needed/day shift) at the Institute for Human Caring (IHC) Services in Gardena, CA or Tukwila WA.

We are seeking a Senior Clinical Data Analyst who will support the leadership team at Providence Home and Community Care (HCC) with data extraction, validation and various analysis as it relates to measuring and monitoring in HCC. The scope of the work for this position is across the enterprise focusing on developing metrics and analytics for Home Health, Hospice, Skill Nursing Facility and Elder programs. This will primarily consist of report and dashboard design, data retrieval, report generation, data analysis and validation, database complex query validation, statistical analysis, dashboard updates, financial modeling, data integration from multiple sources and maintenance of databases. Will also be responsible for supporting a number of projects with varying complexity and reporting requirements.
In this position you will:
Demonstrate PSJH core values of respect, justice, compassion, stewardship, and excellence to customers, employees, and visitors; and provides quality service in the performance of work assignments and duties
Maintain confidentiality of all information related to patients, medical staff, employees, and as appropriate, other information
Develop and execute SQL queries, extract data in support of analyses, and performs reporting tasks from clinical information systems
Demonstrate skill developing qualitative and quantitative measurement, summarizing results of data file and the follow-up tasks on the data structure to solve related problems and inconsistencies such as missing data or incorrect data values
Demonstrate positive interpersonal skills by effectively collaborating with other team members to identify and resolve problems related to measurement projects
Provide guidance to Healthcare Intelligence team in identifying new data elements
Maintain HCC dashboards published on Tableau server with most up to date data extracts
Integrate datasets retrieved from external data sources and identify opportunities for automation in data extraction
Assist internal customers with data input, reporting, graphing and analysis
Perform other duties as assigned

Required qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree in Statistics, Information Technology, Engineering, Economics or public health
Six (6) years of industry related experience
Demonstrate knowledge of Epic focusing on both quality and financial data
Demonstrate knowledge of billing and claims data in hospice, home health and skilled nursing facility
Demonstrate knowedge of SQL, Python, Tableau and MS Office
Demonstrate skills in validation of large data sets and understands the measurement discrepencies due to workflow opportunities
Demonstrate skills in using interrelational databases and integration large dataset for multiple data sources
Successfully able to present work, especially to non-analysts, enabling the data to become actionable information
Demonstrate knowledge of data value stream

Preferred qualifications:
Master's degree in Statistics, Information Technology, Engineering, Economics or public health
Epic Certification for Clarity database
Eight (8) years of industry related experience
About the hospital you will serve.
Providence Strategic and Management Services provides a variety of functional and system support services for all
eight regions of Providence Health & Services from Alaska to California. We are focused on supporting our Mission by
delivering a robust foundation of services and sharing of specialized expertise.,PIH Health is a nonprofit, regional healthcare network that serves approximately 3 million residents in the Los Angeles County, Orange County and San Gabriel Valley region. The fully integrated network is comprised of PIH Health Hospital - Whittier, PIH Health Hospital - Downey and PIH Health Good Samaritan Hospital, 27 outpatient medical locations, a multispecialty medical (physician) group, home healthcare services and hospice care, as well as heart, cancer, women’s health, urgent care and emergency services. The organization is recognized by Watson Health as one of the nation’s Top Hospitals, and College of Healthcare Information Management Executives (CHIME) as one of the nation’s top hospital systems for best practices, cutting-edge advancements, quality of care and healthcare technology. PIH Health is certified as a Great Place to Work TM. For more information, visit PIHHealth.org or follow us on Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram.

This position maintains various databases and information resources in support of quality management, risk adjustment and performance improvement activities. Data entry to third party vendor to fulfill external reporting requirements. Analyzes, tracks and trends data. Serves as interdepartmental liaison and resource for quality management, risk adjustment and performance improvement data.

Required Skills
Knowledge of Information Systems technology. Ability to discuss system problems and requirements with managers and employees in user functions, and be able to present findings in verbal and written form.
The ability to follow directions provided by other department management, staff, and physicians on the development of reports.
Experience in creating reports that contain statistical analysis, data interpretation, and report presentation to the different groups of users of information within the organization.
Ability to convert data files in specified formats based on health plan requirements.
Knowledge in Excel, Access, Visio and other office products
SQL and VBA
Required Experience
Bachelor’s degree in healthcare related discipline or other appropriate college level education or equivalent experience.
Two or more years of experience working with databases/data warehouses; managing and interpreting patterns and trends is required
Specific knowledge and understanding of statistical and technical applications.
Training in data abstraction preferred.
Beyond the benefits that come with working for the area's leading community healthcare provider – one that also recognizes the need to ensure patient safety and comfort – you'll enjoy an extremely competitive compensation and benefits package. We are an equal opportunity employer and seek diversity in our workforce. EOE M/F/D/V

Job Location
Whittier, US-CA,GoHealth is looking for a Data Analyst to join its Operational Analytics team. You will be responsible for using a combination of business intuition and analytics to provide executive leadership with actionable insights to drive strategic decision-making and maximize company-wide value. You will be responding to the live needs of the business, and helping to solve problems and answer questions as they arise. Due to the dynamic nature of the Operational Analytics team, and this role in particular, we seek entrepreneurial candidates with the ability to derive analytical insights from a variety of business contexts.

Due to the unprecedented situation of COVID-19, GoHealth has decided to protect our current and future employees by managing our business remotely. This is inclusive of interviewing, onboarding and each role day-to-day. Please consider that our roles will not be remote long-term and will return to an office setting once we're safe to do so following the guidance of local health authorities' and the CDC.

Responsibilities:
Understand GoHealth's business processes, including the role each business unit plays in supporting the company's ultimate objectives
Collaborate with leaders to understand key value drivers and challenges within their business unites and determine the key metrics and insights that can help improve performance as a result.
Provide new and creative insights to business leaders through a combination of descriptive and diagnostic analytics
Test hypotheses across functions using measurable, statistically-significant methods to evaluate best performing strategies
Build interactive dashboards and reports that provide insights that can be easily interpreted and applied by business leaders to help improve their performance
Collect, analyze, and evaluate data to track project performance and important developments
Synthesize raw data into digestible and actionable information
Continually think of new ways that data-based insights can help support GoHealth
Skills & Experience:
BS or BA degree in business, economics, finance, accounting, marketing analytics, MIS, computer science, engineering, or equivalent work experience.
0-2 years of related experience in an internship or full-time role guiding strategic decision-making using data and analytics.
Ability to take insights and turn them into actionable steps that can drive business value.
Proficiency in Microsoft Excel.
Track record of effective verbal and written communication of complex concepts to colleagues with varying degrees of analytical knowledge and understanding.
Desire to improve and expand analytical and data visualization skills.
SQL, Python, and/or Tableau skills are preferred.
Benefits & Perks:
Open vacation policy
401k program with company match
Medical, dental, vision, and life insurance benefits
Flexible spending accounts
Commuter and transit benefits
Professional growth opportunities
Casual dress code
Generous employee referral bonuses
Happy hours, ping-pong tournaments, and more company-sponsored events
Subsidized gym memberships
GoHealth is an Equal Opportunity Employer
*LI-JC1,Lead Data Analyst

***Note - only applicants currently living in the Chicago area will be considered***

The Lead Data Analyst will develop, present, and deliver on strategic projects at First Stop Health including (but not limited to) fostering client engagement, forecasting financial and operational outcomes, implementing business definitions, and ensuring data integration, integrity, and end-user availability.
This role will report to the Chief Financial Officer and collaborate and present data reporting (dashboards, visualizations, etc.) and recommendations to our Leadership Team.

Principle Duties & Responsibilities:

Under the direction of the Chief Financial Officer:
Maintain and enhance the Keboola-Snowflake-Looker analytics ETL to efficiently support a broad range of business needs, minimize technical debt, and comply with HIPAA
Maintain integrations with production data sources by configuring/customizing Keboola extractor components and writing Snowflake SQL transformations
Lead full-cycle business logic and report development from stakeholder engagement to hands-on implementation primarily using Snowflake SQL and LookML
Balance self-service analytics and data governance by curating Looker field definitions and Confluence documentation while managing requests using Slack and Monday
Conduct analytics data quality testing through row-level reconciliation and user acceptance testing before finalizing major code changes
Serve as a liaison between business users and the application development team
Be experienced in creating presentations and recommendations via dashboards and similar tools for executive leadership
Develop, communicate, and enforce data governance policies where appropriate
Lead the administration, maintenance, and data governance of analytics software
Execute on other data analytics requests in keeping with business needs
Manage the day to day tasks and professional development of 1 Data Analyst
Knowledge, Skills & Experience
Required Background
Bachelors degree
Minimum of 3+ years of relevant data analytics work experience
Preferred Knowledge and Experience
Healthcare operations
Financial operations
Required Proficiencies (minimum of 1+ years of proven experience)
Writing advanced SQL (e.g., window functions, query optimization, and a deep understanding of how to clean messy data)
Creating visualizations and dashboards with business intelligence software (e.g., Looker, Power BI, or Tableau)
Developing and leading long-term data analytics and data governance initiatives that require collaboration with a wide range of business stakeholders
Communicating the business value and limitations of an analysis to stakeholders verbally, in writing, and through technical reports
Maintaining analytics/data governance documentation intended for business users with a wide range of technical proficiency
Preferred Proficiencies
Leveraging APIs within a production ETL pipeline environment
R or Python, particularly for statistical analysis
Soft Skills
An analytical mind and intellectual curiosity about how data drives business decisions
Take pride in being the source of truth
Good sense of humor
Our corporate values are to be Caring, Unrelenting, Trusted and Transparent.
We expect everyone on our team to display these values and we celebrate them.
About First Stop Health

First Stop Health was founded by serial entrepreneurs with a track record of success. We offer an independent working environment, stock options to all employees, a progressive vacation policy, and excellent healthcare and 401(k) benefits for employees and their families to professionals who are committed to the success of our company.,Analyze sequencing data from RNA-seq, RNA methylation (m6A)-seq, m6A RNA RIP-seq, RNA-CLIP-seq, and metabolome studies, and develop new analyzing tools using R, Python and other coding programs when necessary. Review and revise existing analysis tools and protocols. Perform statistical analysis of large sets of sequencing and metabolome data, maintain a high standard managing complex data, and prepare figures for presentation, grant application and publication.

Analyze sequencing data from RNA-seq, RNA methylation (m6A)-seq, m6A RNA RIP-seq, RNA-CLIP-seq, and metabolome studies.
Use, review, revise and develop new computer programs for data analysis.
Purify experimental samples and build sequencing libraries.
Perform statistical analysis of large sets of sequencing and metabolome data.
Prepare figures for presentation, grant application and publication.
Present and discuss research work at lab group meetings.
Discuss ongoing work regularly with advisor.
Willingness to learn and improve/develop techniques.

Master’s degree in computer science and Bachelor’s degree in industrial engineering or applied mathematics, with background and experience in biomedical research.
Demonstrated computational, statistical and mathematical abilities for sequencing and other data analysis.
Previous laboratory experience preferred.
Strong analytical, computational and organizational skills with consistent attention to detail.
Strong verbal and written communication skills
The candidate will be skilled in designing and executing data analysis.
The candidate will be diligent with documentation, detail oriented and well organized.
The candidate will have the ability to work independently and under supervision, and function as a research team member
Proficient in Microsoft Word and PowerPoint, with advanced skills in Excel (or similar) for data curation, analysis and visualization.
Experience with database or statistical tools such as R, SASS or SPSS required,Job Detail
Job Title:
Data Analyst - Rush Infectious Diseases
Department:
Infectious Dis Admin
Shift:
1st
Full/Part:
Active Regular FT (72 to 80 hours per pay period)
Specialty:
Data Analysis
Job Number:
2020-1777

Job Description:


The Rush Infectious Diseases Department is currently seeking an experienced Data Analyst to join their dynamic team.

Position Highlights:

The Chicago Prevention and Intervention Epicenter (Chicago PIE) is the core of a $10 million CDC-funded research program with the overarching goal of preventing healthcare-associated infections. One of only eleven Prevention Epicenters in the U.S., we have been funded continuously since 2006. Current investigations include monitoring the regional transmission of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae using whole genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, investigating and improving skin antisepsis in critically ill patients to reduce the risk of invasive infection, and characterizing the relationship between the gastrointestinal microbiome and risk of multidrug resistant organism transmission and infection. We collaborate with investigators across the nation to advance the field of infection prevention and discover new ways to protect patients. For more information: https://www.cdc.gov/hai/epicenters/chicago.html. The Data Analyst is responsible for collecting data, quality control of the databases, and statistical analysis of data. The Data Analyst will collect and analyze data, interpret results, and submit reports and recommendations to the research team. The Data Analyst will support and help the research team interpret results from the analysis and corresponding reports. The Data Analyst will work under the supervision of the Senior Data Analyst. Exemplifies the Rush mission, vision and values and acts in accordance with Rush policies and procedures.

Position Responsibilities:

This position may be responsible for one or more of the following:
Coordinates data management including collection, entry, manipulation, analysis and reporting.
Provides timely data analysis that relates research projects at Rush.
Writes SQL queries to extract data from databases for analysis.
Assists in the development of data storage, including methods for quality control.
Uses statistical approaches to analyze data from multiple sources and synthesizes results into meaningful reports and presentations.
Maintains data security and confidentiality of all activities.
Coordinates and prepares reports for internal and external audiences.
Works closely with research lab personnel to determine the best and most efficient ways to organize and enter lab research data into the various databases.
Works closely with the Principal investigators, Statisticians, etc. to adjust the analytical tools and reports.
Required Position Qualifications:
Bachelor's Degree.
2 years of experience.
Understanding of concepts in methodology, data collection, and analyses.
Proficient with medical terminology.
Data management experience.
Knowledgeable in database rules, writing queries, and relational database creation and management (create, query, relate).
Unique combinations of both hard and soft skills in order to prepare, analyze, and present data.
Proficient in the use of statistical software and techniques in the analysis and interpretation of complex data sets. SAS and Microsoft Access experience preferred.
Strong analytical and problem solving skills.
Strong verbal and written communication skills.
Proficient computer skills including query tools, web-based applications, word processing, spreadsheets, graphs, PowerPoint, and database management.
Ability to manage multiple projects essential.
Ability to work independently or in groups.
Ability to prioritize time.
Ability to adapt to a rapidly changing environment.
Ability to collaborate in cross-functional and interdisciplinary quality improvement teams at every level of the medical center.
Advanced ability to create summary reports using statistical tools, charts, and graphs.
Company Highlights:
Rush was recently ranked first for Quality and Accountability among US academic medical centers in a study conducted by the health care performance improvement company Vizient.
The Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP) has awarded Rush full accreditation for three years. Rush is one of the first academic medical centers in Illinois to receive this accreditation.
As an academic medical center, Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, Illinois, is committed to advancing medical knowledge through research. Investigators at Rush are involved in more than 1,600 projects, including hundreds of clinical studies to test the effectiveness and safety of new therapies and medical devices, as well as to expand scientific and medical knowledge.
RUMC offers a competitive salary, outstanding benefits & the professional advantages of an environment that supports your development & recognizes your achievements.
Rush University is home to one of the first medical colleges in the Midwest and one of the nation's top-ranked nursing colleges, as well as graduate programs in allied health, health systems management and biomedical research.
Rush is an equal opportunity employer. We evaluate qualified applicants without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, and other legally protected characteristics.

Complete Application,The Senior Data Analyst will generate and translate complicated digital marketing performance data from a variety of sources into a valuable, data-based analytical story easily digestible for different stakeholders across the organization. You will combine digital channel expertise with strong analysis and data visualization skills in order to provide fresh insight and analysis based on HIMSS proprietary audience intelligence platform and market research.
The things that you will tackle:
Develop and oversee audience segmentation strategies, including developing strategies around the collection of data and activities to obtain the data.
Leverage data warehouse to visualize and create real time reporting dashboards in data visualization tools for business and campaign level insights.
Manage, run, interpret, and share recurring weekly and monthly performance media campaign results from multiple marketing channels.
Provide solicited and unsolicited ad-hoc reports and analysis that are immediately actionable by stakeholders at all levels.
Provide insight and intelligence of database information and audience engagement results to evaluate liabilities, assess performance, identify database marketing opportunities and track audience engagement patterns.
Design and deliver ongoing analysis to provide marketing, sales and key business stakeholders with insights to make smart decisions based on data and not assumptions.
Perform and oversee marketing campaign and channel analysis.
Develop marketing dashboards, reports, and visualization that track key performance indicators and calculate return on investment for presentations to teammates and marketing teams, as well as the senior leadership team. These reports should help accurately forecast marketing and business results.
Perform data mining and statistical analysis to produce insights that drive data-driven content and marketing campaigns. Translate data into meaningful strategic and tactical recommendations based on these analyses.

Bachelor’s degree or additional equivalent experience.
A minimum of three (3) years of successful, related and progressive experience in data management in an agency environment.
Strong analytical competencies such as ability to formulate an analytical problem; QC data and results; summarize key findings/insights; make actionable recommendations
Excellent project management skills with strong attention to detail
Excellent presentation skills and comfortable telling stories using data to bring up new opportunities or best practices to improve operations and growth
Excellent written and verbal communication and presentation skills. Effective listener.
Outstanding interpersonal skills with strong personal integrity
Technical skills
MS Office (Outlook, PPT, Word, Excel, Visio), Google Docs, Dropbox
Comfortable with CMS software

Our talent anywhere philosophy allows employees the flexibility to work virtually on an as-needed or permanent basis.
Competitive, comprehensive healthcare coverage.
Generous paid time off, including time off to volunteer!
401K with employer match and profit sharing.
Be Well! Lifestyle reimbursement program.
Tuition reimbursement and professional development programs.
Are you a Changemaker?
We’ll do amazing things for healthcare.
HIMSS is an Equal Opportunity Employer: M/F/Vets/Disabled,Department:

13900_87000 Development Office

Expected Weekly Hours:

40

Shift:

Day Shift

Position Purpose:

Job Description Details:

Under general supervision and acting on their own initiative, the Operations Associate - Data Analyst supports the Office of Philanthropy through the entry, analysis and reporting of donor and prospect data from various sources to advance fundraising initiatives. This position also functions as one of the subject matter experts for the Trinity Health Donor Data Management application (Blackbaud CRM) in the Office of Philanthropy.

In addition, this positions provides support and backup to the team for diverse operational duties including gift processing, donor acknowledgements and correspondence, data entry, tracking department schedules, extracting/analyzing data and workflow, planning and organization of meeting and events, and coordinating office operations. S/he will serve as a liaison between the Office and internal and external constituencies. Assignments involve work of a confidential nature and require a thorough knowledge of Office and Health Systems processes and procedures.

ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Test and deploy custom reports, database queries, exports, Key Performance Indicators (KPI) dashboards within Philanthropy information systems. Acquires data from primary or secondary data sources while maintaining databases. Filter and "clean" data acquired by reports and queries, prioritized by fundraising needs.
Performs all aspects of data entry and gift processing Xeroxing, depositing, batch entry, and producing reports for all gifts. Generates acknowledgments, receipts, batch reports and special letters in a timely manner and proofreads for accuracy. Updates database with information by team members and data health and accuracy tasks. Manages reporting and acknowledgements for memorial/honor programs.
Composes, prepares, proofs and edits internal and outgoing correspondence and reports. Word processes or types and distributes a variety of material such as correspondence, memoranda, reports, charts, schedules, minutes, etc.
Responds to matters in connection with executive leadership, physicians and Health System departments, including administrative detail while acting under general supervision or on own initiative. Performs expediting, problem-solving and service support to organizational and outside contacts as required. Refers information and/or questions to responsible individual as required.
Initiates and tracks workflow, calendars, schedules, and projects through the Department to ensure paperwork is complete and appropriate, and that follow up responses and/or services are provided in a timely fashion. Prepares and processes invoices, expense reports, and personnel and payroll forms as needed/directed.
Organizes and follows up on plans for meetings: coordinates with participants; prepares, assembles and distributes meeting information/material; sets up/oversees meeting logistics including rooms, equipment and catering as needed. Attends meetings and participates on committees as directed. Takes, organized and types meeting minutes as required.
Reviews and answers mail and inquires on own initiative, where appropriate, and determines within established guidelines if executive action is required. Researches background information necessary for required action or follow up.
Deals discretely with sensitive, confidential information concerning professional and personal performances of staff and information concerning donors contained in minutes, correspondence, memoranda and other documents.
Sets up and organizes files and record retentions systems. Maintains files and security of confidential information, e.g., patient medical records, hospital financial information, salaries, staff and legal information or a confidential nature. Maintains office equipment and supplies.
Supports the office operations of the Department through other duties as needed.
MINIMUM EDUCATION AND/OR WORK EXPERIENCE
Bachelors degree preferred, High School diploma or equivalent required. At least four years of related experience preferred.
Proficiency in word processing and Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook) applications required.
Ability to work basic mathematical calculations; understand/use computerized data information.
Knowledge of Blackbaud CRM or similar donor database software required.
Highly professional appearance/presentation required.
Excellent grammar/language skills.
QUALIFICATIONS

The attributes of ideal candidates for this position include:
Team and service oriented
Advanced verbal skills
Critical thinking
Ability to work with and analyze data
Interest in and understanding of fundraising and philanthropy
An engaging personality and telephone manner
A personality oriented to exceptional customer service and sincere enjoyment of

interactions with a variety of people
Significant attention to detail
Understands and appreciates process
Exceptionally well organized
Office skills (software, database, composition, editing, proofreading, etc.)
Ability to multitask
Self-starter who consistently takes initiative
Trinity Health's Commitment to Diversity and Inclusion

Trinity Health employs about 133,000 colleagues at dozens of hospitals and hundreds of health centers in 22 states. Because we serve diverse populations, our colleagues are trained to recognize the cultural beliefs, values, traditions, language preferences, and health practices of the communities that we serve and to apply that knowledge to produce positive health outcomes. We also recognize that each of us has a different way of thinking and perceiving our world and that these differences often lead to innovative solutions.

Trinity Health's dedication to diversity includes a unified workforce (through training and education, recruitment, retention and development), commitment and accountability, communication, community partnerships, and supplier diversity.,Department

Mile Square Health Center - Main

Description

The University of Illinois Hospital & Health Sciences System - Mile Square
Health Center is seeking a Clinical Practice Data Analyst Specialist (Clinical
Research Data Manager). The Clinical Research Data Manager will be responsible
for all data management activities, including clinical research and quality
database development, maintenance, quality control, and reporting to support
clinical and population health research and quality improvement activities at
MSHC. The Research Data Manager will also provide support to research and
quality improvement projects approved by the Research Council.

The work schedule for this position will be from 8:30am to 5:00pm Monday-
Friday.

Duties

Job_Requirements_and_Duties:_
Develop and maintain large-scale research databases and project related
data repositories.
Design and development of databases, tools, developing data management
plans and procedures, and study maintenance activities. This includes but
is not limited to modifying study databases, developing data queries,
producing and reviewing data reports, performing data reviews, resolving
data discrepancies, reconciling data from different sources, importing/
merging data from various sources, communicating with study staff,
receiving external data files, transferring data sets, and conducting
study close-out activities such as locking and archiving study databases.
Develop, write, and execute code to query data for analysis,
discrepancies, and quality control. Use code to automate pre-set reports
and dashboards.
Contribute to the conceptualization, design, development and delivery of
biomedical informatics research projects, addressing all areas of
clinical and translational science for UICC.
Analyze project results and develop outcomes reports and recommendations.
Candidate must be comfortable using a wide variety of databases and tools
including: SQL, MS Access, Excel etc. connected to a standard databases
like Hadoop, Kaboodle, Oracle, SQL Server, MySQL, performs SSIS, ETL
processes to integrate data from disparate sources etc. into the OMOP
CDM.
Use knowledge of programming languages like Java, Net, PHP, Python and
statistical software like SAS or R etc. to establish analytical
algorithms for research data analysis and perform cohort identification
for research.
Prepare for and attend weekly project meetings with current and relevant
data.
Research core literature in the biomedical informatics field to identify
appropriate advances and new trends.
Interpret critical biological findings and translates biological
discoveries into clinical utility. Outcomes from projects provide
resources and technologies that facilitate clinical and translational
science research at the University and partner institutions.
Conduct data entry and data abstraction for Research Council applications
and related projects, such as verifying the significance and value add of
a proposed project as well as providing support with the abstraction of
data for approved projects that request retrospective chart reviews.
Propose new research agendas and programs based on independent analysis
and in-depth understanding of the field of clinical & translational
research.
Perform other related duties and participate in special projects as
assigned.
Qualifications
Minimum_Acceptable_Qualifications:

Bachelor s degree in Science, Information Management, Healthcare Informatio
Nursing, Information Technology, Computer Science, Statistics, Finance,
Management Engineering, Business or closely related fields or as required by
the position to be filled in the area of specialization inherent in the
position may be required.
One (1) year (12 months) of data management/analyst work experience in a
clinical or healthcare related field
Applicants possessing a Master's degree, in a closely related field, meet the
requirements for #1 above.

Preferred_Qualifications
A minimum of 3 years of related research experience in clinical and/or
research informatics preferred.
Must be proficient in the use of statistical packages for managing data
and conducing quality control checks.
Requires excellent communication, organization, presentation, analytical
and computer/pc skills, to include statistical software like SAS or R,
Microsoft Office and other reporting software.
REDCap experience is a plus.
Advanced skills in data analytics and data mining. Excellent problem
solving skills and abilities.
To Apply: For fullest consideration, please complete an online application by
clicking the Apply for Position button below.

Please upload all valid certifications and transcripts within the document
section of your online application. Documentation of high school completion
(official transcripts, copy of diploma or GED certificate) is required in order
to be eligible for this position within the University of Illinois Hospital and
Health Sciences System.

All civil service positions require an exam. The exam for this position is a
Credentials Assessment. You will not be required to report in person for this
exam.

Credential_Assessment_Exam_Scoring_Information

You will notbe required to report in person for this exam. The updated online
application and all uploaded, relevant documents, such as a resume and/or
college transcript will be used in the calculation of the exam score. These
documents should be uploaded prior to the position close date.

When completing your online application, please be sure to provide detailed
information about your job knowledge and specific duties and responsibilities,
as your qualifications for any Civil Service position will be primarily
determined based on what is contained in the application. Dates of employment
and if employed on a full or part time basis (including number of hours per
week) must be indicated for each position held. Additional consideration will
be given to supporting documentation i.e. resume, transcripts, licenses, and
certifications so please be sure to attach all applicable documents.

If a degree or college coursework is required, you must provide official
transcripts.

Transcripts/Licenses/Certifications MUST be uploaded electronically to your
online application through the "Documents" page on the Civil Service Employment
Application (page 4). Be sure to select the appropriate document type before
uploading the document.

If your educational institution provides electronic transcripts, please have
them sent to .

If your educational institution doesn t provide electronic transcripts, the
must mail the transcripts to:

University of Illinois at Chicago
Recruitment and Staffing
Human Resources Building Room 109
715 S. Wood Street M/C 862
Chicago IL 60612
Attn: HB1033 - Clinical Practice Data Analyst Specialist - KG

If an application and all applicable forms, transcripts, and supporting
documents are not submitted by the close date, the applicant/employee will not
be considered for this position and will be denied.

For fullest consideration, the above mentioned requirements must be submitted
no later than July 13, 2020.

We appreciate your interest in employment at the University of Illinois at
Chicago.

The University of Illinois is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

This position requires Illinois residency within 180 days of the hire date.
Show moreShow less,Title:
Clinical Practice Data Analyst Specialist (Clinical Research Data Manager) - Mile Square Main (Job ID #124130)

Department:
Mile Square Health Center - Main

Category:
Civil Service

Location:
UI Health

Close Date:
07/13/2020

Hours Per Week:
Monday -Friday 830am - 500pm

Shift:
Days

Description:
The University of Illinois Hospital & Health Sciences System - Mile Square Health Center is seeking a Clinical Practice Data Analyst Specialist (Clinical Research Data Manager). The Clinical Research Data Manager will be responsible for all data management activities, including clinical research and quality database development, maintenance, quality control, and reporting to support clinical and population health research and quality improvement activities at MSHC. The Research Data Manager will also provide support to research and quality improvement projects approved by the Research Council.

The work schedule for this position will be from 8:30am to 5:00pm Monday-Friday.

Duties:
Job Requirements and Duties:
Develop and maintain large-scale research databases and project related data repositories.
Design and development of databases, tools, developing data management plans and procedures, and study maintenance activities. This includes but is not limited to modifying study databases, developing data queries, producing and reviewing data reports, performing data reviews, resolving data discrepancies, reconciling data from different sources, importing/merging data from various sources, communicating with study staff, receiving external data files, transferring data sets, and conducting study close-out activities such as locking and archiving study databases.
Develop, write, and execute code to query data for analysis, discrepancies, and quality control. Use code to automate pre-set reports and dashboards.
Contribute to the conceptualization, design, development and delivery of biomedical informatics research projects, addressing all areas of clinical and translational science for UICC.
Analyze project results and develop outcomes reports and recommendations. Candidate must be comfortable using a wide variety of databases and tools including: SQL, MS Access, Excel etc. connected to a standard databases like Hadoop, Kaboodle, Oracle, SQL Server, MySQL, performs SSIS, ETL processes to integrate data from disparate sources etc. into the OMOP CDM.
Use knowledge of programming languages like Java, Net, PHP, Python and statistical software like SAS or R etc. to establish analytical algorithms for research data analysis and perform cohort identification for research.
Prepare for and attend weekly project meetings with current and relevant data.
Research core literature in the biomedical informatics field to identify appropriate advances and new trends.
Interpret critical biological findings and translates biological discoveries into clinical utility. Outcomes from projects provide resources and technologies that facilitate clinical and translational science research at the University and partner institutions.
Conduct data entry and data abstraction for Research Council applications and related projects, such as verifying the significance and value add of a proposed project as well as providing support with the abstraction of data for approved projects that request retrospective chart reviews.
Propose new research agendas and programs based on independent analysis and in-depth understanding of the field of clinical & translational research.
Perform other related duties and participate in special projects as assigned.

Qualifications:
Minimum Acceptable Qualifications:

1. Bachelor’s degree in Science, Information Management, Healthcare Information, Nursing, Information Technology, Computer Science, Statistics, Finance, Management Engineering, Business or closely related fields or as required by the position to be filled in the area of specialization inherent in the position may be required.

2. One (1) year (12 months) of data management/analyst work experience in a clinical or healthcare related field

**Applicants possessing a Master's degree, in a closely related field, meet the requirements for #1 above.

Preferred Qualifications:
A minimum of 3 years of related research experience in clinical and/or research informatics preferred.
Must be proficient in the use of statistical packages for managing data and conducing quality control checks.
Requires excellent communication, organization, presentation, analytical and computer/pc skills, to include statistical software like SAS or R, Microsoft Office and other reporting software.
REDCap experience is a plus.
Advanced skills in data analytics and data mining. Excellent problem solving skills and abilities.
To Apply: For fullest consideration, please complete an online application by clicking the Apply for Position button below.

Please upload all valid certifications and transcripts within the document section of your online application. Documentation of high school completion (official transcripts, copy of diploma or GED certificate) is required in order to be eligible for this position within the University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System.

All civil service positions require an exam. The exam for this position is a Credentials Assessment. You will not be required to report in person for this exam.

Credential Assessment Exam Scoring Information:

You will not be required to report in person for this exam. The updated online application and all uploaded, relevant documents, such as a resume and/or college transcript will be used in the calculation of the exam score. These documents should be uploaded prior to the position close date.

When completing your online application, please be sure to provide detailed information about your job knowledge and specific duties and responsibilities, as your qualifications for any Civil Service position will be primarily determined based on what is contained in the application. Dates of employment and if employed on a full or part time basis (including number of hours per week) must be indicated for each position held. Additional consideration will be given to supporting documentation i.e. resume, transcripts, licenses, and certifications so please be sure to attach all applicable documents.

If a degree or college coursework is required, you must provide official transcripts.

Transcripts/Licenses/Certifications MUST be uploaded electronically to your online application through the "Documents" page on the Civil Service Employment Application (page 4). Be sure to select the appropriate document type before uploading the document.

If your educational institution provides electronic transcripts, please have them sent to kglover@uic.edu.

If your educational institution doesn’t provide electronic transcripts, they must mail the transcripts to:

University of Illinois at Chicago
Recruitment and Staffing
Human Resources Building Room 109
715 S. Wood Street M/C 862
Chicago IL 60612
Attn: HB1033 - Clinical Practice Data Analyst Specialist - KG

If an application and all applicable forms, transcripts, and supporting documents are not submitted by the close date, the applicant/employee will not be considered for this position and will be denied.

For fullest consideration, the above mentioned requirements must be submitted no later than July 13, 2020.

We appreciate your interest in employment at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

The University of Illinois is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

This position requires Illinois residency within 180 days of the hire date.,Position Description

Under supervision of the Data Warehouse Analytics Manager, the Data Analyst applies analytical methods to Harris County Public Health (HCPH) data from a variety of sources and maintains various data files. Assists in provision of data-driven information that contributes to the process of descriptive and analytic information routinely collected and reported regarding program evaluation, occurrence and emerging public health issues in the HCPH jurisdiction and Harris County.

Duties and Responsibilities:
Analyzing Data and Reports
Provides technical expertise in statistical analysis and epidemiological methods and techniques, as well as entering, cleaning, analyzing, and reporting data gathered through the data warehouse platform.
Geocodes data to develop sub-county disease rates and provides mapping to identify transmission patterns and detect possible disease clusters.
Assists with the creation of enterprise reports for HCPH and other forums.
Performs data cleaning and recoding for annual creation of analysis files and assists in the creation of documentation and guidelines for use.
Writes abstracts, presentations, and posters for scientific conferences.
Responds as directed to requests for special reports, data analysis, or presentations.
Demonstrates strong abilities to interpret data, identify trends, establish/utilize benchmark data, and present information in clear, concise, and useful formats, including data visualization and interpretation of information.
Develops, tests, and implements dashboard reporting to provide senior leadership and executive staff, as well as other internal and external customers, with performance data and trend information in an easily accessible and readily understandable format.
Other
Performs other duties as assigned, including special tasks involved in responding to an emergency event.
Harris County is an Equal Opportunity Employer
https://hrrm.harriscountytx.gov/Pages/EqualEmploymentOpportunityPlan.aspx
If you need special services or accommodations, please call (713) 274-5445 or email ADACoordinator@bmd.hctx.net

Requirements
Bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university in data analytics/science, demography, social science, health services research, biostatistics, applied statistics, epidemiology, or related field; and
Two (2) years of experience performing data collection, analysis, and reporting on social, economic, demographic, and health data in a public health, medical, or hospital setting.
Experience analyzing data using statistical software to calculate mortality or rates, measures of association, confidence intervals, and tests of significance.
Experience in data management, data documentation (e.g. metadata, technical notes, etc.) and data integrity maintenance.
Experience producing data products, translating technical information into easy-to-understand formats (e.g. dashboards or other visualization tools/techniques).
Ability to use business intelligence software such as PowerBI or comparable programs to extract data and analyze complex databases.
Experienced with statistical analysis software (SPSS, STATA, or SAS).
Must have intermediate competence in Microsoft Office software skills.
Intermediate ability to display data and statistics graphically to demonstrate trends.
Valid Driver’s License (Texas upon hire) along with a good driving record required for regular travel between locations.
NOTE: To qualify for this position, required education, experience, knowledge and skills must be clearly stated on your application's employment history. Resumes are welcome, but we do not use any information provided on your resume to qualify and refer you to the Hiring Department for consideration.
Preferences
Master's degree in biomedical sciences, statistics, epidemiology, or related science degree.
Experience in software design, modeling and coding (SQL, PowerBI).
General Information

LOCATION:
Houston
HOURS:
40 Hours per Week
May require periodic overnight, out of county travel, long work hours, or overtime during emergencies and disasters.
SALARY:
Commensurate with Experience
Based on 26 Pay Periods
Additional Information - Core Competencies
Organizational Leadership
Understands the organizational mission.
Understands ethics and public good; is concerned with public trust.
Demonstrates respect for the opinions and beliefs of others.
Collaboration
Demonstrates a sense of responsibility for the success of the group.
Collaborates with others to improve quality and address needs.
Innovation
Ability to adapt to change.
Interpersonal Abilities/Personal Characteristics
Uses sound judgment.
Self-motivated.
Organizes and maintains work environment to allow for maximum productivity.
Communication
Communicates clearly and effectively, both orally and in writing.
Written and verbal English competency.
Able to read and follow directions.
Due to a high volume of applications positions may close prior to advertised closing date.

BENEFITS
Harris County offers a competitive benefits program, including comprehensive group health and related benefits plan as well as defined benefit retirement plan.
The following list of benefits is offered only to employees in regular (full-time) positions:
Medical
Dental
Vision
Wellness
Life Insurance
Long-term disability
Employee Assistance Program
10 days of vacation each year for the first five (5) years of service. Accrual rates increase based on years of service.
10 county holidays plus one (1) floating holiday
Professional development opportunities
Dependent Care Reimbursement Plan
Healthcare Reimbursement Account
457 Deferred Compensation Plan
The following benefits are also available to regular (full-time) employment and may be available to part-time employees:
Retirement pension (TCDRS)
Flexible schedules (varies by department)
Transportation Assistance (Metro RideSponsor Program)

In accordance with the Harris County Personnel Regulations, Group Health and related benefits are subject to amendment or discontinuance at any time. Commissioners Court reserves the right to make benefit modifications on the County's behalf as needed.
For plan details, visit the Harris County benefits website:
https://hrrm.harriscountytx.gov/Pages/Medical.aspx

01

Do you have a Bachelor's Degree [or higher] from an accredited college or university?
Yes
No

02

If you answered Yes in response to the previous question, which of the following fields of study best relates to your degree in relevance to this position?
Data analytics/science
Demography
Social science
Health services research
Biostatistics
Applied statistics
Epidemiology
Related field
None of the Above

03

Please describe your educational background including the level of education completed, area of study, completed major and minor programs and/or relevant coursework as it relates to this position.

04

Which of the following best describes your verifiable paid experience in performing data collection, analysis, and reporting on social, economic, demographic and health data in a public health, medical or hospital setting?

(To be considered, qualifying experience must be clearly documented on your application's employment history).
Less than two years
Two years, but less than three
Three years, but less than four
Four years, but less than five
Five years, but less than six
Six or more years
I do not have this type of experience

05

Please describe your verifiable experience performing data collection, analysis, and reporting on social, economic, demographic and health data in a public health, medical or hospital setting.

Please include: (a) your role(s), (b) types of organization(s), and (c) scope of duties and responsibilities.

If you do not have this experience, type "none" in the space provided.

06

Do you have experience analyzing data using statistical software to calculate mortality or rates, measures of association, confidence intervals and tests of significance?

(To be considered, qualifying experience must be documented on your application's employment history).
Yes
No

07

Please describe your experience analyzing data using statistical software to calculate mortality or rates, measures of association, confidence intervals and tests of significance.

Please include: (a) your role(s), (b) types of organization(s), and (c) scope of duties and responsibilities.

If you do not have this experience, type "none" in the space provided.

08

Do you have experience in data management, data documentation (e.g. metadata, technical notes, etc.) and data integrity maintenance?

(To be considered, qualifying experience must be clearly documented on your application's employment history).
Yes
No

09

Please describe what type of experience you have in performing data management, data documentation (e.g. metadata, technical notes, etc.) and data integrity maintenance.

Please include: (a) your role(s), (b) types of organization(s), and (c) scope of duties and responsibilities.

If you do not have this experience, type "none" in the space provided.

10

Do you have experience producing data products, translating technical information into easy-to-understand formats (e.g. dashboards or other visualization tools/techniques)?

(To be considered, qualifying experience must be documented on your application's employment history).
Yes
No

11

Please describe what type of experience you have performed in producing data products, translating technical information into easy-to-understand formats (e.g. dashboards or other visualization tools/techniques).

Please include: (a) your role(s), (b) types of organization(s), and (c) scope of duties and responsibilities.

If you do not have this experience, type "none" in the space provided.

12

Which of the following describes your level of proficiency using a personal computer and common office software? Please select your level of proficiency based on the following descriptions:

Advanced:
A person with this level of skills is able to produce very large, complex formal documents that require a table of contents, footnotes, endnotes, bookmarks, and other special elements; a wide range of graphic effects, and use advanced techniques for analyzing and manipulating data. Has full mastery of Macro commands and skills to tie the objects together into a cohesive system by using Macros and Visual Basic for Applications code. Makes interactive presentations by using hyperlinks and action buttons.

Intermediate:
A person with this level of skills is able to customize toolbars, import and insert graphs, embed Excel data, and elaborate reports. Understands the concepts of databases and is able to work with charts and to use the list management capabilities of Excel. Able to use complex query techniques, create efficient forms and reports, and create Macros to automate these forms. Makes interactive presentations by using hyperlinks and action buttons.

Basic:
A person with this level of skills is able to use basic formatting, editing, printing functions, and understands the document page setup. Has the ability to enter and correct data, modify a workbook, format a worksheet, and use printing functions. Understands the different database concepts and structures and is familiar with data validation and is able to create a simple
presentation in PowerPoint, run it, and print it.

Entry Level:
A person with this level of skills has the ability to open, create, save and modify documents in Word, send and receive email in Outlook and create spreadsheets in Excel. Format documents for printing, comfortable using the printer menu to preview documents. Has ability to change the font, the margins, insert or delete pages and use the built-in spellchecker and grammar check.
Advanced
Intermediate
Basic
Entry Level
Not proficient

13

Which of the following programs have you used during your employment? Select all that apply
PowerBi
GIS
Metadata
SQL
SPSS
SAS
STATA
StatCrunch
Other
None of the above

14

This position requires a valid driver's license. Upon hire, a Texas license must be obtained by start date.

Do you have a valid driver's license?
Yes
No

15

Please provide your current driver's license number, state and expiration date.

If you do not have a driver's license please enter N/A.

Required Question,Overview

Data Analyst & Healthcare Analytics

Location: Pearland Administrative Office

Department: KS Plan Advantage- Health Care Finance
Job Type: Full Time

COMPANY PROFILE

Kelsey-Seybold Clinic. Changing the way health cares.

Kelsey-Seybold Clinic is Houston's premier multispecialty group practice, founded in 1949 by Dr. Mavis Kelsey. With more than 21 clinic locations and more than 400 physicians, Kelsey-Seybold provides medical care in 55 medical specialties and is home to a nationally accredited Breast Diagnostic Center, Endoscopy Center, Infusion Center and Cancer Center. Our mission is to provide our team members with exceptional opportunities for professional and personal growth.

JOB SUMMARY

The Healthcare Finance (HCF) department exists to monitor and improve the financial performance of Kelsey-Seybold's product lines and health plans. The HCF Analytics team is a customer service-focused department providing consultation to the KS executive team as well as to select operational and functional departments. The HCF Analytics team works closely with internal and external partners to identify revenue and cost savings opportunities, support new product and business development, ensure regulatory compliance, inform contract negotiations and complete reconciliation of incentive arrangements, claims, capitation, and premium payments with other payers, vendors and/or government entities.

The HCF department is adequately staffed by highly skilled, motivated and inquisitive individuals that deliver complex analysis of financial and utilization data to support revenue enhancement and identify cost savings opportunities. The Analyst II provides financial data, reporting and other actionable information to the HCF Management Team and other departments regarding the business units, process, products and/or service lines as directed by the manager. The Analyst II is able to independently identify areas requiring additional investigation and perform analyses with less guidance than more junior analysts. Responsibilities related to this position include:
Creating/producing financial reports, analysis and financial reconciliations required to understand the key drivers of the relevant business unit or service line.
Helping to develop the systems and processes that are the foundation for reporting and analysis.
Providing analytical support to internal customers including the Central Business Office, Pharmacy Services, Business Planning, Accounting, Managed Care Contracting, Claims, Marketing, and Utilization Management departments and partnering with the Business Intelligence team to automate and improve reporting.
Discussing findings with internal customers.
Acting as a subject matter and technical resource for more junior analysts.
EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS

(A = basics; B = preferred)

Education

A.

Bachelor's Degree in Finance, Economics, Mathematics, Healthcare Administration, or related field; or Associate's Degree with equivalent work experience

B.

Experience

A.
3-5 years of experience in data analysis, decision support, medical economics, healthcare informatics, or managed healthcare or equivalent combination of education and experience to demonstrate ability to succeed in healthcare analytics
Demonstrated initiative and problem solving skills
Demonstrated analytical/modeling skills with ability to convert raw data into actionable business insights
B.
Demonstrated ability to analyze and report on business units, products or service lines
Experience in the healthcare industry with understanding of data in healthcare organizations (including claims data, ICD10, Medicare Advantage, Health Insurance Marketplace, capitated payment models)
Licenses

A.

B.

Special Skills

A.
Advanced proficiency in Microsoft Excel
Basic knowledge of Microsoft Power Point and Microsoft Word
Experience with SQL or other programming tools (including Visual
B.
Experience writing, debugging and documenting complex queries against relational databases
Experience with Statistical Software (including SAS, R, Minitab, SPSS)
Other
A.

B.

WORKING ENVIRONMENT

Office,The Data Analyst will analyze large amounts of data, expose and measure the current performance of Operations, find and quantify opportunities for improvement, dive deep into existing data to root cause unexpected performance, build metrics, business cases, and standard reports around key business stakeholder initiatives. The Data Analyst will support Operations to produce and deliver continuous improvement through rigorous analysis to drive critical organizational decisions.

The ideal candidate must:
Be an advanced user of data querying tools, and an expert at synthesizing and communicating insights and recommendations to audiences of varying levels of technical sophistication
Be highly analytical, have an extremely high level of customer focus and passion for process improvement, and demonstrate the ability to execute the required skills, influence, educate, and drive results in a fast paced, ambiguous environment
Required Skills
Translate business questions and concerns into specific quantitative questions that can be answered with available data using sound methodologies. In cases where questions cannot be answered with available data, work with engineers to produce the required data
Develop, launch and manage in-depth KPI's, dashboards and reports for all team functions at both management and individual level
Perform data validation to ensure accuracy and appropriateness of operational activities related to existing business processes or new implementation projects.
Tracking and evaluating changes and updates to source production system changes after release
Data visualization – design and develop Tableau dashboards to support ongoing business need
Retrieve, synthesize, and present critical data in a format that is immediately useful to answering specific questions or improving system performance.
Required Experience

GENERAL QUALIFICATIONS
Bachelor’s degree in Statistics, Economics, Math, Finance, Engineering, Computer Science or a related quantitative field
At least 4 years of experience and high levels of proficiency in SQL, and query optimization
Strong experience with automated self-service reporting tools (e.g. Tableau)
Knowledge of data modeling and advance visualization tools (MS Power BI, Tableau, MS Access) experience
At least 4 years of experience articulating business questions and using quantitative techniques and driving insights for business
Ability to operate successfully and independently in a fast-paced environment
Self-starter, possess high aptitude to accept complex assignments, analyze problems, provide effective solutions and lead project implementation
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS
Master’s degree in Statistics, Applied Mathematics, Operations Research, Economics or a related quantitative field.
5+ years’ experience with 2+ years Analytics and Process Improvement-related initiatives
Intermediate to Advanced knowledge of relational databases and ability to independently extract data using multiple tables, joins, and various complex data manipulation query logic statements.
Experience leading small to medium sized projects involving complex data sets and high variability
Ability to aggregate complex data in a clear and consistent manner, experience in generating regular service performance reports for the senior management
Job Location
Houston, US-TX,Position Description

Under the supervision of the Data/Tech Deputy Director for the Harris County Justice Administration Department, the Senior Data Analyst will be responsible for designing, developing, testing, maintaining, and supporting County data analytics and reporting solutions in compliance with the O’Donnell Consent Decree.

The Senior Data Analyst will manage inter-agency data integration and reporting needs as required by the Federal Court Monitor and County stakeholders. Identifies, analyzes, and reports trends across data sets and conduct research and data collection to support the goals of the Consent Decree.

Duties and Responsibilities:
Designs and develops enterprise and departmental business intelligence, data warehousing, and reporting solutions required by the consent decree
Develops and implements reporting and analytic requirements while working with business users and consent decree stakeholders in compliance with federal consent decree deadlines
Develops and implements the Extract Transform Load (ETL) process, reports, and queries in support of business analytics as required by the federal consent decree
Performs other duties as assigned
Harris County is an Equal Opportunity Employer
https://hrrm.harriscountytx.gov/Pages/EqualEmploymentOpportunityPlan.aspx
If you need special services or accommodations, please call (713) 274-5445 or email ADACoordinator@bmd.hctx.net

Requirements
Bachelor's degree in a quantitative field such as Computer Science, Engineering, Statistics, Mathematics or Management Information Systems; and
A minimum of five (5) years of experience working in an analytical position involving ETL and Business Intelligence (BI) application development, to include Data Warehouse Design
Knowledge, Skills & Abilities:
In-depth knowledge of Enterprise data systems, SQL, writing and managing stored procedures
Experience in managing and administration of SQL databases
Experience in enterprise ETL tools, such as SSIS (SQL Server Integration Services) or Informatica
Experience with Cloud based technology such as Snowflake
Experience in developing KPI dashboards and applications using Power BI or Tableau
Experience in creating ad hoc reports from multiple databases and distribution of reports using SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS)
Must be detail oriented and highly organized
NOTE: To qualify for this position, required education, experience, knowledge, and skills must be clearly documented on your application's employment history. You may attach a resume to the application as supporting documentation but ONLY information stated on the application will be used for consideration. "See Resume" will not be accepted for qualifications.
Preferences
Knowledge of statistics, Python or R, and Java Script
General Information

LOCATION:
Downtown Houston, TX
HOURS:
40 Hours per Week
Occasional Nights and Weekends as Needed
SALARY:
Commensurate with experience
Based on 26 pay periods
Due to a high volume of applications positions may close prior to the advertised closing date.

BENEFITS
Harris County offers a competitive benefits program, including comprehensive group health and related benefits plan as well as defined benefit retirement plan.
The following list of benefits is offered only to employees in regular (full-time) positions:
Medical
Dental
Vision
Wellness
Life Insurance
Long-term disability
Employee Assistance Program
10 days of vacation each year for the first five (5) years of service. Accrual rates increase based on years of service.
10 county holidays plus one (1) floating holiday
Professional development opportunities
Dependent Care Reimbursement Plan
Healthcare Reimbursement Account
457 Deferred Compensation Plan
The following benefits are also available to regular (full-time) employment and may be available to part-time employees:
Retirement pension (TCDRS)
Flexible schedules (varies by department)
Transportation Assistance (Metro RideSponsor Program)

In accordance with the Harris County Personnel Regulations, Group Health and related benefits are subject to amendment or discontinuance at any time. Commissioners Court reserves the right to make benefit modifications on the County's behalf as needed.
For plan details, visit the Harris County benefits website:
https://hrrm.harriscountytx.gov/Pages/Medical.aspx

01

Do you have a Bachelor's degree in a quantitative field such as Computer Science, Engineering, Statistics, Mathematics or Management Information Systems?
Yes
No

02

Please describe your educational background including the level of education completed, area of study, and completed major and minor programs.

03

Which of the following best describes your years of experience working in an analytical position involving ETL and Business Intelligence (BI) application development, to include Data Warehouse Design?

(To be considered, qualifying experience must be documented on your application's employment history)
Less than one year
One year or more but less than two
Two years or more but less than three
Three years or more but less than four
Four years or more but less than five
Five years or more but less than six
Six or more years
I do not have this experience

04

Describe your years of experience working in an analytical position involving ETL and Business Intelligence (BI) application development, to include Data Warehouse Design

05

Describe your experience in the management and administration of SQL databases.

If you do not have this experience, please type "none" in the space provided.

06

Describe your experience with enterprise ETL tools, such as SSIS (SQL Server Integration Services) or Informatica.

If you do not have this experience, please type "none" in the space provided.

07

Describe your experience with Cloud-based technology such as Snowflake.

If you do not have this experience, please type "none" in the space provided.

08

Describe your experience in developing KPI dashboards and applications using Power BI or Tableau.

If you do not have this experience, please type "none" in the space provided.

09

Describe your experience creating ad hoc reports from multiple databases and distribution of reports using SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS).

If you do not have this experience, please type "none" in the space provided.

10

Do you have knowledge of statistics, Python or R, and Java Script?
Yes
No

11

Describe your knowledge of statistics, Python or R, and Java Script.

If you do not have this knowledge, please type "none" in the space provided.

Required Question,OverviewCBO Data AnalystLocation: Pearland Administrative OfficeDepartment: Health Care FinanceJob Type: Full TimeCOMPANY PROFILEKelsey-Seybold Clinic. Changing the way health cares.Kelsey-Seybold Clinic is Houston's premier multispecialty group practice, founded in 1949 by Dr. Mavis Kelsey. With 19 clinic locations and more than 400 physicians, Kelsey-Seybold provides medical care in 55 medical specialties and is home to a nationally accredited Breast Diagnostic Center, Endoscopy Center, Infusion Center and Cancer Center. Our mission is to provide our team members with exceptional opportunities for professional and personal growth.JOB SUMMARYThe Consulting Analytics team serves as the go-to resource for providing reporting, support, and analysis to external departments with the ultimate goal of identifying and supporting initiatives to further the Kelsey Triple Aim - value, quality, and the patient experience. The team develops in-depth expertise in enterprise data assets and in mining patient and healthcare provider data to deliver actionable insights to supported business units.The Central Business Office (CBO) analyst will serve as a primary resource for providing reporting, support, and analysis to the CBO, which is responsible for billing and collections of insurance and self-pay accounts for 400+ physicians and two Ambulatory Surgery Centers in the greater Houston area. The analyst in this position will develop a thorough understanding of the revenue cycle (insurance verification, charge and claim creation, payment posting, insurance follow-up, and refunds) and the related systems used within the organization. The position requires development of an in-depth knowledge of Epic Resolute Professional Billing and the associated Clarity SQL reporting warehouses.Daily activities will require heavy use of Excel, including advanced formulas, pivot tables, Power Pivot, and Visual Basic and/or macros, writing and editing SQL queries via SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS), and basic knowledge of Access and Crystal Reports to maintain and troubleshoot existing processes. In addition, the position requires development of SSRS and Power BI proficiency. Technical skills can be acquired on the job.EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS(A = basics; B = preferred)EducationA.Bachelor's Degree in Finance, Economics, Mathematics, Healthcare Administration, or related field; or Associate's Degree with equivalent work experienceB.ExperienceA.* 1-4 years of experience in data analysis, decision support, medical economics, healthcare informatics, or managed healthcare or equivalent combination of education and experience to demonstrate ability to succeed in healthcare analytics* Demonstrated initiative and problem solving skills* Demonstrated analytical/modeling skills with ability to convert raw data into actionable business insightsB.* Demonstrated ability to analyze and report on business units, products or service lines* Experience in the healthcare industry with understanding of data in healthcare organizations (including claims data, ICD10, Medicare Advantage, Health Insurance Marketplace, capitated payment models)LicensesA.B.Special SkillsA.* Advanced proficiency in Microsoft Excel* Basic knowledge of Microsoft Power Point and Microsoft Word* Experience with SQL or other programming tools (including Visual Basic and Excel macros)B.* Experience writing, debugging and documenting complex queries against relational databases* Experience with Statistical Software (including SAS, R, Minitab, SPSS)* Knowledge of Crystal Reports, Microsoft Access, or SSRSOtherA.* Fluent in English both verbal and written, effective communicator* High level of accuracy with excellent attention to detail* Strong organizational and time management skills* Proven ability to work in a dynamic setting and balance multiple priorities while meeting deadlinesB.Ability to communicate complex information in a clear and concise mannerWORKING ENVIRONMENTOffice,About Us
Harris Health is a nationally recognized health system comprising three teaching hospitals and an extensive network of ambulatory care centers serving the people of Harris County, Texas, since 1966. Staffed by the faculty, fellows and residents from two nationally ranked medical schools, Baylor College of Medicine and The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), Harris Health is the first healthcare system in Houston to receive the prestigious National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) designation for its network of patient-centered medical homes.

Each year, Harris Health provides more than 1.8 million total outpatient visits through its more than 40 ambulatory care facilities. Additionally, Harris Health sees more than 177,000 emergency visits at its Level 1 and Level 3 trauma centers and 35,000 hospital admissions through its two hospitals: Ben Taub and LBJ.

Established by voter referendum to enhance the level of charity care available in the community, Harris Health System has often received national recognition for serving those in need and for its achievements in operational excellence, such as being named to the 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 Most Wired Hospitals lists by the American Hospital Association’s Hospitals & Health Networks magazine.

Additionally, Harris Health System is pleased that each of its hospitals — Ben Taub and Lyndon B. Johnson — achieved Pathway to Excellence™ designation by the American Nurses Credentialing Center.
Job Profile

JOB SUMMARY:

The Lead Quality Data Analyst collaborates with and provides consultation to Harris Health System Nursing Leadership and works closely with the Director of Nursing Quality to design and implement tools and processes to facilitate standard and accurate data collection, analysis, and reporting of data in accordance with professional and regulatory standards. This individual designs, builds, manages, and modifies systems and data bases at the system level. This individual coordinates data activities for Nursing across the system, including formatting and presenting data as usable information; tracking and trending information and creating and generating reports from various data sources. This individual provides oversight control over nursing data and is responsible for the data integrity and the data repositories. This individual also provides consultation to the Harris Health System Leadership related to audit activities, benchmarking, process evaluation, and outcomes development.

The Lead Quality Data Analyst upholds high standards of integrity, ethical behavior, mentors others, role models professionalism and participates in activities such as professional organizations, research and the community.

MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:

Education/Specialized Training/Licensure:

a. Masters Degree required;
b. Training in database design, process design, audit tool design;
c. Excel, Access, Scantron software, PowerPoint, SPSS, Risk Pro, Word, Share Point, Readiness Rounds, V-Survey, infoEDGE; and
d. Five plus (5+) years applicable experience.
Work Experience: Five plus (5+) years in related data analyst or quality role preferred in health care setting.
Equipment Operated: Computer, scanner, fax printers, copiers, etc.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:

Communication Skills:

Above Average Verbal (Heavy Public Contact)
Exceptional Verbal (e.g., Public Speaking)
Writing /Composing (Correspondence / Reports)

Other Skills:

Analytical CRT
Design Medical Terms Mathematics
PC Research Statistical
Word Proc

Advanced Education:

Masters Degree

Work Schedule:

Flexible On Call

Other Requirements:

a. Advanced database experience in maintaining and troubleshooting;
b. Computer literacy at an advanced level;
c. Experience in analyzing and presenting data in documents, graphs and verbally; and
d. Advance customer service skills.
Benefits and EEOC
Harris Health System's benefits program is designed to provide you with more flexibility and choices in meeting your specific needs. Harris Health System's benefits program allows you to protect your income in case of illness, death and disability, and to help you save for retirement.

It is the policy of Harris Health System to provide equal opportunity for all applicants for employment regardless of political affiliation, race, color, national origin, age, sex, religious creed or disability. Applicants may request any reasonable accommodation(s) to participate in the application process.
Job Category
Professional,OverviewSenior Data Operations AnalystLocation: Pearland Administative OfficeDepartment: KS Plan Advantage - Health CareJob Type: Full-timeCOMPANY PROFILEKelsey-Seybold Clinic. Changing the way health cares.Kelsey-Seybold Clinic is Houston's premier multispecialty group practice, founded in 1949 by Dr. Mavis Kelsey. With more than 21 clinic locations and more than 400 physicians, Kelsey-Seybold provides medical care in 55 medical specialties and is home to a nationally accredited Breast Diagnostic Center, Endoscopy Center, Infusion Center and Cancer Center. Our mission is to provide our team members with exceptional opportunities for professional and personal growth..JOB SUMMARYThe Healthcare Finance (HCF) department exists to monitor and improve the financial performance of Kelsey-Seybold's (KS) product lines and health plans. The HCF Analytics team is a customer service-focused department providing consultation to the KS executive team as well as to select operational and functional departments. The HCF Analytics team works closely with internal and external partners to identify revenue and cost savings opportunities, support new product and business development, ensure regulatory compliance, inform contract negotiations and complete reconciliation of incentive arrangements, claims, capitation, and premium payments with other payers, vendors and/or government entities. The HCF department is adequately staffed by highly skilled, motivated and inquisitive individuals that deliver complex analysis of financial and utilization data to support revenue enhancement and identify cost savings opportunities.The Senior Analyst will provide data, systems support, and analysis related to risk adjustment and quality data submissions. The team operates the CMS Encounter Data and HEDIS vendor software solutions and implements reporting and analysis specific to Medicare risk adjustment, RAPS, EDPS and HEDIS. The team analyzes and researches all encounter data errors and submission issues, collaborating with internal departments to work toward error resolution. The Senior Analyst is able to independently identify areas requiring investigation, define and perform analyses, and recommend solutions with little to no guidance.Key responsibilities of this position include:• Encounter Data Analyst: Creating submissions and evaluating encounter data to identify errors created by operational, claims, and eligibility processes. Working with cross-functional teams to resolve errors and ensure completeness and accuracy of submissions.• HEDIS/Quality Reporting Analyst: Mapping, verifying, and loading HEDIS data sources to calculate measure results and prepare member level detail to support audited reporting and quality improvement initiatives.• System Support Analyst: Helping to develop and maintain the systems and processes that are the foundation of risk adjustment and quality data operations• Report Writer: Developing, producing, and analyzing reports and data required to understand submission status and rejection issues related to risk adjustment and quality data submissions• Acting as a subject matter and technical expert for more junior analysts.EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS(A = basics; B = preferred)EducationA.Bachelor's Degree in Finance, Economics,Mathematics, Healthcare Administration,Computer Science or related fieldB.Associates Degree in Radiologic TechnologyExperienceA.5+years of experience in dataanalysis, decision support, medicaleconomics, healthcare informatics,or managed healthcare orequivalent combination ofeducation and experience todemonstrate ability to succeed indata operations• Demonstrated initiative andproblem-solving skills with ability toconvert raw data into actionablebusiness insights• Demonstrated data extract andtransformation skillsB.* Experience in the healthcare industrywith understanding of data inhealthcare organizations (includingclaims data, ICD10, MedicareAdvantage, Health InsuranceMarketplace, capitated paymentmodels)• Experience with ANSI 5010 837 dataspecificationsLicensesA.B.Special SkillsA.* Advanced proficiency in MicrosoftExcel• 3+ years' experience with SQL orother programming tools (includingVisual Basic and Excel macros)• Experience writing, debugging anddocumenting complex queriesagainst relational databases• Basic knowledge of MicrosoftPower Point and Microsoft WordB.* Familiarity with EPIC and Clarityreporting data warehouse• Knowledge of Crystal Reports,Microsoft Access, or SSRSOtherA.* Fluent in English both verbal andwritten, effective communicator• High level of accuracy withexcellent attention to detail• Strong organizational and timemanagement skills• Proven ability to work in a dynamicsetting and balance multiplepriorities while meeting deadlines• Superior analytical skills• Ability to communicate complexinformation in a clear and concisemannerB.WORKING ENVIRONMENTClinical,OverviewHCC Data AnalystLocation: Pearland Administrative OfficeDepartment: KS Plan Advantage- Healthcare Finance Job Type: Full TimeCOMPANY PROFILEKelsey-Seybold Clinic. Changing the way health cares.Kelsey-Seybold Clinic is Houston's premier multispecialty group practice, founded in 1949 by Dr. Mavis Kelsey. With 19 clinic locations and more than 400 physicians, Kelsey-Seybold provides medical care in 55 medical specialties and is home to a nationally accredited Breast Diagnostic Center, Endoscopy Center, Infusion Center and Cancer Center. Our mission is to provide our team members with exceptional opportunities for professional and personal growth.JOB SUMMARYThe KCA Financial Operations team serves as the primary resource for providing reporting, support, and analysis related to the financial performance of KelseyCare Advantage, a Medicare Advantage health plan. The team's core areas of focus include CMS payment processes related to the Monthly Membership Report (MMR) and Plan Pay Report (PPR), medical cost and utilization trend analysis, and CMS risk adjustment (HCC) and 5-Star analysis and initiative support.The HCC Analyst will serve as the primary resource for providing reporting, support, and analysis related to risk score based on the CMS-HCC model for KelseyCare Advantage. The analyst in this position will develop a thorough understanding of the Medicare risk adjustment model and provide operational support to the HCC Coding team to identify provider coding trends and areas of opportunity, use clinical and claims data to identify members requiring chart review or care gap closure, and monitor changes in the disease burden of the population as a result of membership changes, aging of the population, and implementation of coding initiatives. The position requires development of an in-depth knowledge of Epic Tapestry claims data, Epiccare visit documentation data, data from an in-house custom chart review application, and pharmacy claims data.Daily activities will require heavy use of Excel, including advanced formulas, pivot tables, Power Pivot, and Visual Basic and/or macros, writing and editing SQL queries via SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS). In addition, the position requires development of SSRS and Power BI proficiency.EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS(A = basics; B = preferred)EducationA.Bachelor's Degree in Finance, Economics, Mathematics, Healthcare Administration, or related fieldB.ExperienceA.* 5+ years of experience in data analysis, decision support, medical economics, healthcare informatics, or managed healthcare or equivalent combination of education and experience to demonstrate ability to succeed in healthcare analytics• Demonstrated initiative and problem solving skills• Demonstrated analytical/modeling skills with ability to convert raw data into actionable business insightsB.* Demonstrated ability to analyze and report on business units, products or service lines with minimal supervision/direction• Experience in the healthcare industry with understanding of data in healthcare organizations (including claims data, ICD10, Medicare Advantage, Health Insurance Marketplace, capitated payment models)LicensesA.B.Special SkillsA.* Advanced proficiency in Microsoft Excel• Basic knowledge of Microsoft Power Point and Microsoft Word• Experience with SQL or other programming tools (including Visual Basic and Excel macros)• Experience writing, debugging and documenting complex queries against relational databasesB.* Experience with Statistical Software (including SAS, R, Minitab, SPSS)• Familiarity with EPIC and Clarity reporting data warehouse• Knowledge of Crystal Reports, Microsoft Access, or SSRSOtherA.* Fluent in English both verbal and written, effective communicator• High level of accuracy with excellent attention to detail• Strong organizational and time management skills• Proven ability to work in a dynamic setting and balance multiple priorities while meeting deadlines• Superior analytical skills• Ability to communicate complex information in a clear and concise mannerB.WORKING ENVIRONMENTOffice,PRACTICE OVERVIEW
Radiology Partners is the largest and fastest growing on-site radiology practice in the US. We are an innovative practice focused on transforming how radiologists provide consistently exceptional services to hospitals, imaging centers, referring physicians and patients. With our state-of-the art clinical technology, specialized expertise, access to capital, and retention of top physician talent, Radiology Partners reliably exceeds the expectations of our clients, patients, and partners. We serve our clients with an operational focus, and, above all, a commitment to quality patient care. Our mission is To Transform Radiology.

PRACTICE OVERVIEW
Radiology Partners is the largest and fastest growing on-site radiology practice in the US. We are an innovative practice focused on transforming how radiologists provide consistently exceptional services to hospitals, imaging centers, referring physicians and patients. With our state-of-the art clinical technology, specialized expertise, access to capital, and retention of top physician talent, Radiology Partners reliably exceeds the expectations of our clients, patients, and partners. We serve our clients with an operational focus, and, above all, a commitment to quality patient care. Our mission is To Transform Radiology.

POSITION SUMMARY
Radiology Partners has an open position for a Business Analyst on the IT Data Warehouse team. The position will report to the Manager, IT Data Warehouse and be responsible for working with many areas within the IT and Clinical teams with a focus on workflow and requirements.

POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
General
Obtain an expert level of data flow
Assist with root cause analysis for data integrity issues
Able to work with physicians and various levels of support staff
Assist in documentation creation
Assist in building non-standard data flows
Create, maintain and improve data processing and documentation
Assist in analyzing and auditing data flow – making recommendations for quality improvement
Highly detail-oriented with the ability to track and manage multiple work efforts concurrently
Ability to effectively align work with stakeholder priorities and execute in a fast-paced environment
Data flow
Develop an in-depth understanding of our customer’s and Rad Partner’s internal data flows
Document existing customer data flows using data flow charts
Document existing internal RP data flows
Facilitate working sessions with customers
Work with internal and external customers to propose changes to data flow
Work with project managers and project teams to plan and implement data flow changes
Conduct knowledge transfer sessions with Development teammates on existing and proposed internal and external data flows
Conduct and facilitate data flow sessions internally and with our customers
Assist in the integration out of new sites
Requirements Gathering
Gather and document requirements for practice information enhancements and integrations
Gather and document requirements for existing data integrations to the DWH including feature / release requests
Work with Development staff and end user to understand requests and translate into requirements
Work with Development staff to develop estimates
Work with Project Managers to develop projects plans including deliverables and due dates
Work with support team to develop test plans and participate in testing
Assist in setting development priorities and bug fixes
Work with our vendors to request and prioritize changes and enhancements
DESIRED TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE
5+ years combined IT and healthcare experience
Understanding of data flow between EHR / EMR and PACS, voice recognition applications, etc.
Experience with data architecture, data warehousing, and data modeling, within the healthcare sector, a plus
Familiarity with SSIS, SSRS, Tableau, Control-M, Jira, confluence, bit-bucket a plus
Knowledge of HIPAA data privacy practices and laws a plus
Proficient in Business Analyst skills:
o Interaction with all levels of the business
o Creation of Issue statements, project objectives
o Documentation of data flows
o Gathering and documenting requirements
o Crafting and implementing solutions
Able and interested in working a flexible schedule. We can work in the office and from home.
CCPA Notice: When you submit a job application or resume, you are providing the Practice with the following categories of personal information that the Practice will use for the purpose of evaluating your candidacy for employment: (1) Personal Identifiers; and (2) Education and Employment History.

Job Type: Full-time

Benefits:
401(k)
Dental Insurance
Disability Insurance
Flexible Spending Account
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Paid Time Off
Parental Leave
Professional Development Assistance
Relocation Assistance
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Experience:
business analyst: 1 year (Preferred)
Education:
Bachelor's (Preferred)
Work authorization:
United States (Preferred)
Work Remotely:
Yes,Overview

Healthcare Information and Data Analyst II

Location: Pearland Administrative Office

Department: KS Plan Advantage- Health Care Finance
Job Type: Full Time

COMPANY PROFILE

Kelsey-Seybold Clinic. Changing the way health cares.

Kelsey-Seybold Clinic is Houston's premier multispecialty group practice, founded in 1949 by Dr. Mavis Kelsey. With more than 21 clinic locations and more than 400 physicians, Kelsey-Seybold provides medical care in 55 medical specialties and is home to a nationally accredited Breast Diagnostic Center, Endoscopy Center, Infusion Center and Cancer Center. Our mission is to provide our team members with exceptional opportunities for professional and personal growth.

JOB SUMMARY

The Healthcare Finance (HCF) department exists to monitor and improve the financial performance of Kelsey-Seybold's product lines and health plans. The HCF Analytics team is a customer service-focused department providing consultation to the KS executive team as well as to select operational and functional departments. The HCF Analytics team works closely with internal and external partners to identify revenue and cost savings opportunities, support new product and business development, ensure regulatory compliance, inform contract negotiations and complete reconciliation of incentive arrangements, claims, capitation, and premium payments with other payers, vendors and/or government entities.

The HCF department is adequately staffed by highly skilled, motivated and inquisitive individuals that deliver complex analysis of financial and utilization data to support revenue enhancement and identify cost savings opportunities. The Analyst II provides financial data, reporting and other actionable information to the HCF Management Team and other departments regarding the business units, process, products and/or service lines as directed by the manager. The Analyst II is able to independently identify areas requiring additional investigation and perform analyses with less guidance than more junior analysts. Responsibilities related to this position include:
Creating/producing financial reports, analysis and financial reconciliations required to understand the key drivers of the relevant business unit or service line.
Helping to develop the systems and processes that are the foundation for reporting and analysis.
Providing analytical support to internal customers including the Central Business Office, Pharmacy Services, Business Planning, Accounting, Managed Care Contracting, Claims, Marketing, and Utilization Management departments and partnering with the Business Intelligence team to automate and improve reporting.
Discussing findings with internal customers.
Acting as a subject matter and technical resource for more junior analysts.
EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS

(A = basics; B = preferred)

Education

A.

Bachelor's Degree in Finance, Economics, Mathematics, Healthcare Administration, or related field; or Associate's Degree with equivalent work experience

B.

Experience

A.
3-5 years of experience in data analysis, decision support, medical economics, healthcare informatics, or managed healthcare or equivalent combination of education and experience to demonstrate ability to succeed in healthcare analytics
Demonstrated initiative and problem solving skills
Demonstrated analytical/modeling skills with ability to convert raw data into actionable business insights
B.
Demonstrated ability to analyze and report on business units, products or service lines
Experience in the healthcare industry with understanding of data in healthcare organizations (including claims data, ICD10, Medicare Advantage, Health Insurance Marketplace, capitated payment models)
Licenses

A.

B.

Special Skills

A.
Advanced proficiency in Microsoft Excel
Basic knowledge of Microsoft Power Point and Microsoft Word
Experience with SQL or other programming tools (including Visual Basic and Excel macros)
B.
Experience writing, debugging and documenting complex queries against relational databases
Experience with Statistical Software (including SAS, R, Minitab, SPSS)
Knowledge of Crystal Reports, Microsoft Access, or SSRS
Other

A.
Fluent in English both verbal and written, effective communicator
High level of accuracy with excellent attention to detail
Strong organizational and time management skills
Proven ability to work in a dynamic setting and balance multiple priorities while meeting deadlines
B.

Ability to communicate complex information in a clear and concise manner

WORKING ENVIRONMENT

Office,Statistician/Data Analyst/SQL Coder - (Can be considered for remote)
Do you you have a passion for analyzing complex data and a SQL Developer? Like working with complex SQL Queries? Are you looking to work for a progressive company that’s always moving toward positive change and growth?
Then read on........
At Matrix Medical Network we think the potential of a company is based on the experiences of everyone who works there. Join our diverse team as our next Statistician/Data Analyst/SQL Coder
The Statistician/Data Analyst/SQL Coder will primarily be responsible for querying and analyzing healthcare information provided by clients for the Business Intelligence and Analytics team. The role requires extensive use of SQL to extract data from varied SQL Server databases and utilizing other analysis tools such as Excel, Tableau and statistical packages to provide meaningful analysis to internal and external customers.

Write SQL code to extract and analyze data from multiple data sources.
Develop data visualizations using Tableau or similar tool
Connect to data sources and databases with various architectures and features
Track, analyze and interpret data trends and provide relevant conclusions and recommendations to management
Maintain a thorough understanding of the business process flows and identify and report opportunities for improvement
Identify, report, and participate in data issue validation and resolution
Create forecasts and identify trends and opportunities
Work directly with department leaders to review, enhance and implement, daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly monitoring and reporting to track program performance
Other duties as assigned.

POSITION REQUIREMENTS:
Educational Requirements:
Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science, Mathematics, Analytics or related field; or equivalent experience
Required Skills and Abilities:
3-5+ years SQL Server experience including developing complex queries in a SQL Server environment.
Strong analytical skills with 5+ years data analysis experience.
Experience with T-SQL, stored procedures, functions, common table expressions (CTE).
Strong ability in math and computer science
Strong proficiency with SQL Server, Excel and Tableau or similar tool
Knowledge of statistical concepts preferred (regression, correlation, analysis of variance, etc.)
Aptitude for understanding business environment and translating business requirements to technical solutions.
Ability to handle multiple tasks with high attention to detail, as well as perform duties under minimal supervision is a must.
Excellent communication skills (both written and verbal) and ability to develop and maintain strong working relationships with business partners.
Knowledge and experience in a healthcare environment involving claims management and coding preferred.
**Must have 5 plus years strong data business analytics/analysis, statistical and forecasting background. Requires 5 plus years strong SQL server database, writing SQL code, T-SQL, CTE and working with very complex SQL queries experience to be considered**
Type: Full Time Data Analyst, Sr
Location: Scottsdale Office
Hours: Monday-Friday 8:00-5:00 - Flexible
Matrix Medical Network is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer. Scottsdale, AZ 85258. Primary Location: Scottsdale, AZ 85258. Job: IT— Data Analyst, Sr. Regular Shift. Full-time Job Level: Day Job, Travel, Monday, Friday. No weekend hours. Job, IT Data Analyst, Sr, Full-Time, Regular, Job Type, Standard, Travel, Pay, Regular Hours.,Envision Physician Services is a multispecialty physician group and practice management company. Established in 1953, our organization provides anesthesia, emergency medicine, hospital medicine, radiology, primary/urgent care, surgical services, and women’s and children’s health services to hospitals and health systems nationwide. Sheridan Healthcare, EmCare, Reimbursement Technologies and Emergency Medical Associates have recently joined forces to form Envision Physician Services. As one organization, we now provide a greater scope of service than any other national physician group. Our collective experience from hundreds of local, customized engagements, culture of continuous lean process improvement, and team of experts in the business of healthcare enable us to better solve complex problems and consistently give healthcare organizations confidence in our execution. Our combined organization serves more than 780 healthcare facilities in 48 states and the District of Columbia.
If you are looking for a stable, fast-paced, growing company in the healthcare industry that is committed to innovation, excellence and integrity, then this may be a great next step in the advancement of your career.
Position Summary:
The Clinical Data Analyst is responsible for developing and maintaining department systems, processes and protocols for providing analytical support and database management with excellent customer service and strict adherence to confidentiality.

Work with operations, IT and clinical data resources (both within and outside of the company) to develop data systems and processes, and then ensure that clinical data is downloaded into clinical databases in a timely and secure fashion.
Serve as a consultant to regional operations, divisions, and medical directors in the analysis of specific clinical problems to include: statement of the problem, identification of data elements that might help better understand the problem, establishment of criteria for custom reports, running custom reports and analyzing results.
Independently create and monitor regular performance reports that update the organization on clinical aspects of the strategic plan, key performance indicators, and national initiatives; include progress summaries by operating unit and/or division. Work with large volumes of data sets and relational databases to merge, compare and contrast data from multiple sources.
Receive and analyze supplemental databases that are evaluated for data quality and format. Identify data aberrations and recognize data patterns that impact data outcomes. Correct minor errors related to formatting problems. Work directly with clients and external vendors to resolve problems or data issues that cannot be fixed internally.
Develop, generate and edit reports on a daily, weekly and monthly basis that may evolve into complex data analysis projects that this individual may be responsible for managing; as well as preparing any special ad hoc reports required by management.
Present data in a format that is appropriate for analysis to Clinical Services Team, the Divisional Management Team, and client administration. Select the correct information for calculating financial correlations table configuration, and graphical presentations.
Design and implement divisional reporting standards and templates, then build reporting mechanisms that demonstrate and track key performance metrics in operational, financial and patient and employee satisfaction areas, as well as any other areas determined by management.
Maintain systems for collection and analysis of clinical performance data and process data into periodic reports for management.
Run and distribute regular performance reports that update the organization on clinical aspects of the strategic plan, key performance indicators, and national initiatives; include progress summaries by operating unit, division, and nationally.
Take basic instructions or specifications and interviews the client for complete details sufficient for writing data queries based for ad hoc and ongoing health care measures.
Provide oversight and guidance to Data Analyst and Clinical Coordinators, as needed.
Serve as a resource to individual operations in their running of routine local clinical data reports. In collaboration with regional leadership, establish regular performance reports that update the organization on clinical aspects of the strategic plan, and key performance indicators.
Manage various assigned projects which may include research, analysis, compiling information, and recommendation actions as needed.
Adhere to all company policies and procedures.
Adherence to and compliance with information systems security is everyone’s responsibility. It is the responsibility of every computer user to: Know and follow Information Systems security policies and procedures. Attend Information Systems security training, when offered. Report information systems security problems.
May travel to local operations for meetings related to clinical data and maintaining jurisdictional requirements.
Other duties as assigned

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required.
Advance knowledge of Microsoft Excel, Power Point, and Access with a proven ability to create and maintain databases.
Proficient in Microsoft Word.
Experience in analytical problem solving (including statement of problem, identification and collection of pertinent data, analysis, recommendation, and re-evaluation) strongly preferred.
Healthcare experience and/or knowledge of medical terminology or Emergency Medical Services preferred.
Excellent interpersonal and problem resolution skills required.
Must have strong organizational skills with experience in managing multiple priorities, prioritizing, and meeting deadlines.
Effective oral, written and interpersonal communication skills.
Education/Experience
Bachelor’s degree required, preferably in health sciences, information systems, statistics, or mathematics.
4 or more years’ experience in data analysis.
Computer Skills
To perform this job successfully, an individual should have knowledge of:
Advance knowledge of Microsoft Excel, Power Point, and Access with a proven ability to create and maintain databases.
Proficient in Microsoft Word.
If you are ready to join an exciting, progressive company and have a strong work ethic, join our team of experts! We offer a highly competitive salary and a comprehensive benefits package.
Envision Physician Services uses E-Verify to confirm the employment eligibility of all newly hired employees. To learn more about E-Verify, including your rights and responsibilities, please visit www.dhs.gov/E-Verify.
Envision Physician Services is an Equal Opportunity Employer.,Business Intelligence - Data Analyst

Job Details
Level
Experienced
Job Location
Tempe Main - Tempe, AZ
Position Type
Full Time
Education Level
Bachelor's Degree
Description
Inspiring hope. Empowering transformation from HOPE to HEALTH through COMPASSION, EFFORT and OWNERSHIP.

That’s what we do here at Crisis Response Network.

Join CRN!

We are looking for the "best-of-the-best" to support our expanding business. We are seeking a startup/agile minded Business Intelligence Data Analyst who is passionate about changing the world positively by transforming data into actionable, decision-based information.

Your position will be instrumental in developing and expanding our Business Intelligence, Analytics, and Reporting capabilities. From delivering standard, custom and ad-hoc reporting while refining automation, creating Business Intelligence dashboards, and deep dive data mining to evolving our analytical platform powering our business, customer integrity and growth.

This is both a "ground up" and "reboot" position, so it’s a unique combination of a startup and mature evolving business position. To thrive in this role you need to be entrepreneurial, a self-starter, great at working with others and leading by example leveraging best practice processes, frameworks and outside-the-box solutions that enable our rapid growth and culture.

The right candidate will have the opportunity to work in a super exciting environment with a great team of technologists experiencing accelerated growth. A strategic, critical thinker with a strong focus on data quality management principals with continuous improvement.

Our organization has got plenty of room for you to be creative, solve impossible challenges, try new technologies and have an impact. And…that's just the start... the possibilities are endless! Sound Exciting! CRN is looking for you..!

About You
Confident not arrogant
Curious; humble, hungry and hunting
Grasp new concepts quickly, an innovator, constantly striving for excellence
Detail-oriented; challenging the status quo
Exceptionally strong communicator, listener, and collaborator
Strong desire to work within a fast-paced, constantly ambitious, startup environment
Team-player, yet fully capable of working independently
Accountable, ability to manage time effectively – delivering on commitments
Quality and excellence-driven; take pride in your work always be raising the bar
In this role you will:
Work with CRN Lines of Business leaders, stakeholders and consumers to understand and deliver data, analysis and reporting needs RIGHT THE FIRST TIME
Take ownership over data quality and integrity across all CRN Lines of Business including data sourcing, scrubbing and analysis
Collect and analyze data for validity and accuracy in the preparation of assigned reports
Identify, make recommendations and resolve identified anomalies in data reports
Utilize department/company software to prepare moderate to complex data queries
Create and deliver daily, weekly, monthly and adhoc analytic reports to a variety of internal and external stakeholders
Identify data and reporting challenges; develop and execute improvements
Help define how data will be stored, consumed, integrated, and managed by different data entities. This includes but is not limited to Excel, database (transactional, data marts, data warehouse, and data lakes)
Define and develop procedures; design and develop ETL processes and data storage strategy necessary to support CRN reporting and analytic applications
Education
Bachelor's degree and 3 plus years of experience or
High school diploma / GED and 5 plus years of experience
Desired Experience / Skill / Knowledge
3+ years Business Intelligence, Data Analysis, Data Quality and Reporting experience
Working with business partners to determine reporting/data/visualization requirements
Proven experience providing data dictionary/metadata documentation
Proven experience creating and analyzing reports
Strong data skills - must be comfortable analyzing large quantities of data to create aggregated summaries, develop models, and extract insights to identify data patterns
Strong data management and relational database design skills - familiarity with data formats, table joins, building and executing complex queries and procedure automation
Expert SQL knowledge - Stored Procedures, Query Structure and Optimization, Views
Expert experience with MSBI Stack (SSRS/SSIS/SSAS)
Strong experience in ETL design and tuning
Advanced MS Excel knowledge - Lookups, Macros, Pivots, VBA Functions
Proficiency with IBM Cognos Analytics (report creation, administration and scheduling)
Proficiency with Tableau (dashboard development, Tableau Server, desktop
Nice to Have Experience / Skill / Knowledge
Programming / Scripting Languages - Python / R
Data Visualization Tools - Looker, Qlik
Healthcare industry experience / knowledge (claims, electronic health records, etc)
Why join CRN!!
Attitude: Startup – entrepreneurial culture; creativity, innovation and accountability
Competitive salary with excellent growth opportunities; we value ourselves in having a team that exudes leadership, challenging itself continuously raising the bar
Awesome Health/Benefits: We offer a suite of benefits including Medical, Dental, Vision, company paid life insurance and 401k options
Paid vacation and Holidays
Training and Development: We utilize Pluralsight for technical skills growth and development
Great Location: We are headquartered in Tempe centrally located near Phoenix and surrounding cities.,Job Description
The Medicaid Senior Analyst - Client Data will be a key contact for Medicaid Encounter, Response file, and system enhancements and testing within the Encounter Management System. The Senior Analyst - will assist their department peers and managers in enhancing current business processes.

Other duties include:
• Assisting with the configuration and testing of Encounter Files
• Providing support for and leading projects regarding enhancements or changes to new and existing Encounter processes
• Writing User Stories and using the tools that surround varied methodology.

The preferred candidate will have:
• Experience working with NCPDP Standards (D.0, Post Adjudicated), and State Medicaid Encounter file submissions
• Above average Microsoft Excel skills
• Strong problem solving skills with the ability to work independently
• Previous experience with SDLC, requirements gathering, business process testing/validation, and UAT
• Experience or strong ability to work with SQL, Job submission, database libraries
• Ability to create screen mockup
• Knowledge of pharmacy claims and adjudication
• Working knowledge of Rally or Agile testing
• Experience in claim file delivery, claim research, or data file transmission
• Ability to understand complex system functionality

Required Qualifications
2+ years of Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) or Healthcare industry experience
Preferred Qualifications
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills
Bachelor's Degree from four year college or university
AS400 experience
Education
Verifiable High School Diploma or GED required.

Business Overview
Its a new day in health care.

Combining CVS Health and Aetna was a transformative moment for our company and our industry, establishing CVS Health as the nations premier health innovation company. Through our health services, insurance plans and community pharmacists, were pioneering a bold new approach to total health. As a CVS Health colleague, youll be at the center of it all.

At CVS Health, we work every day to help people on their path to better health. Never has it been more important for us to deliver on our purpose to our valued customers, patients, members, and employees. With a presence in communities across the country, CVS Health colleagues are and will continue to be a critical piece of the countrys health care solution. The health and safety of our employees, patients, customers, and members is our top priority as we face the impact of COVID-19 together. If you would like to learn about the actions we are taking as a company as we learn more about COVID-19 and its spread, we encourage you to visit our COVID-19 resource center at https://cvshealth.com/covid-19
We offer a diverse work experience that empowers colleagues for career success. In addition to skill and experience, we also seek to attract and retain colleagues whose beliefs and behaviors are in alignment with our core values of collaboration, innovation, caring, integrity and accountability.

CVS Health is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer. Gender/Ethnicity/Disability/Protected Veteran we highly value and are committed to all forms of diversity in the workplace. We proudly support and encourage people with military experience (active, veterans, reservists and National Guard) as well as military spouses to apply for CVS Health job opportunities. We comply with the laws and regulations set forth in the following EEO is the Law Poster: EEO IS THE LAW and EEO IS THE LAW SUPPLEMENT. Please note that we only accept applications for employment via this site.

We provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with disabilities. If you need to request an accommodation, a qualified interpreter, written information in other formats, translation or other services, please contact our Advice and Counsel Reasonable Accommodations team by emailing Advice and Counsel Reasonable Accommodations team or calling 877-805-9511.

If technical issues are preventing you from applying to a position, contact Kenexa Helpdesk at 1-855-338-5609 or cvshealthsupport@us.ibm.com. For technical issues with the Virtual Job Tryout, contact the Modern Hire Help Desk at 1-877-451-1695 or cvs_support@modernhire.com.,Data Analyst - Priceguide

Job Details
Level
Experienced
Job Location
Corporate Headquarters - Plymouth Meeting, PA
Position Type
Full Time
Education Level
Bachelor's degree preferred
Salary Range
Undisclosed
Travel Percentage
25%
Job Shift
Day
Job Category
Undisclosed
Description
POSITION SUMMARY

Provide data analysis services and assistance to healthcare and hospital leadership, coordinate and conduct research and assessment activities that provide data to support and enhance decision-making and reporting. Assist with healthcare operations like spend analytics, comparative analytics and technology and market assessment. Demonstrate and maintain an outstanding record of achievement with regard to quality of work, professionalism, work ethic, analysis, resourcefulness, and creativity. Benefit from a healthy work-life balance while thriving in an innovative culture. Sleep well knowing you are helping achieve a world where safe, high-quality healthcare is accessible to everyone.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS
Reasonable Accommodations Statement
To accomplish this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform, with or without reasonable accommodation, each essential function satisfactorily. Reasonable accommodations may be made to help enable qualified individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

Essential Functions Statements(s)
Analyze large amounts of data: facts, figures, and numbers to find conclusions and actionable recommendations for business groups.
Efficiently communicate complex ideas, learn from others, and adopt standards.
Create and troubleshoot simple to advanced level SQL queries.
Support and work with cross-functional teams.
Troubleshoot and effectively diagnose and fix problems.
Adhere to ECRI standards and best practices.
Work independently and within a team when needed.
Participate in team meetings.
Participate in personal growth opportunities.
Provide ongoing support to the leadership within the PriceGuide Service, current clientele
Synthesize information drawn from various ECRI internal databases and external sources to create reports that assist hospitals or healthcare professionals in their decision making process
Assemble large, complex data sets that meet functional / non-functional business requirements
Assist Sales by supporting custom requests, sample analyses and demonstrations
Participate in presentation of said reports as requested either in person or via webinar
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data, review reports and performance indicators to locate and correct data problems
Create and deliver final project deliverables to clients
Work closely with management to prioritize business and information needs
Work directly with clients and internal leadership teams to gather and document project requirements
Qualifications
Experience:
1 - 3 years of recent experience with relational SQL and NoSQL databases, such as SQL Server, PostgreSQL, Cassandra and Redis
Proven working experience as a data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models and data mining
Analyze large amounts of data: facts, figures, and numbers to find conclusions and actionable recommendations for business groups
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Superior customer service and communication skills
Healthcare experience a plus
Education: Associate or Bachelor’s degree in Supply Chain, Data Analytics, Business Analytics or related major degree OR Equivalent professional experience

Computer Skills: Proficient with Microsoft Office 2007+, SQL and NoSQL databases

PHYSICAL DEMANDS
N (Not Applicable)

Activity is not applicable to this position.
O (Occasionally)

Position requires this activity up to 33% of the time (0 - 2.5+ hrs/day)
F (Frequently)

Position requires this activity from 33% - 66% of the time (2.5 - 5.5+ hrs/day)
C (Constantly)

Position requires this activity more than 66% of the time (5.5+ hrs/day)

Physical Demands
Stand

N Lift/Carry
Walk

N 10 lbs or less O
Sit

C 11-20 lbs N
Manually Manipulate

C 21-50 lbs N
Grasp

N 51-100 lbs N
Reach Outward

N Over 100 lbs N
Reach Above Shoulder

N
Speak

C Push/Pull
Climb

N 12 lbs or less N
Crawl

N 13-25 lbs N
Squat or Kneel

N 26-40 lbs N
Bend

N 41-100 lbs N

Other Physical Requirements
Vision (Near)
WORK ENVIRONMENT

Typical Office Environment

Equal Opportunity Employer-Disability and Veteran,Position Overview:

The Sr. Data Analyst plays a key role on the Data Informatics/Data Warehouse team to define requirements, understand business needs and workflows, and work with various business units to provide Data Analysis, Database Backend Applications Maintenance and Development, Reporting and BI solutions that are needed by the organization.

Essential Functions:

· Collaborate with stakeholders to understand, define, and document business questions needs (metrics, dimensions, charts, and dashboards).

· Create and collect feedback on data visualizations (reports/dashboards) to bring insight and answers to business problems/KPIs.

· Serve as primary report writer for all business units.

· Responsible for recurring monthly, weekly, daily, and ad hoc reporting needs.

· Collect and interpret data from multiple sources, both internal& external.

· Develop, create, analyze and distribute management reports as required.

Position Requirements:

· Education: Bachelor’s degree in business, computer science, statistics, mathematics or related field.

· License/Certification: N/A

· Relevant Work Experience: Minimum of 4-5 years’ experience as a reporting or data analyst, reports writer or similar role with a strong understanding of SQL and data modeling.

· 4+ years’ experience with ETL, Data Modeling, Data Warehousing and SSAS preferred

· 4+ years’ experience with contemporary data visualization technology (Power BI, Tableau, Qlik Sense, etc.) preferred

· 4+ years’ experience with Excel preferred

· Healthcare experience is preferred

· Skills:

· Extract data and create reports using tools such as SQL, SSIS, SSRS, Excel, or Access

· Ability to tell stories using data& visualizations

· Plan, design and build ETL solutions for the Data Warehouse

· Knowledge of modern trends, tools and approaches to collection and visualization,Position Summary:

The Data Analyst will be responsible or researching, collecting data and performing statistical analysis needed to monitor trends and patterns. This position will distribute and monitor data analysis projects, support staff in overcoming barriers in their projects and review the accuracy and reliability of data analysis projects.

The Data Analyst is also required to have an advanced understanding of the function and utilization of queries and data tables. This position will take primary responsibility for getting the data right, managing and preparing data for web applications, reports, graphs, charts and Business Intelligence tools. Candidates must be able to organize raw data, produce actionable insights and effectively communicate this information through data visualizations and messaging.

The Data Analyst will work closely with the PMHCC IT Application Programmers Assigned to PMHCC Case Management and will perform several responsibilities at the request of the Programming staff.

Duties and Responsibilities:
• Consult with arid serve as the interface for the purpose of insuring coordination of information systems planning between PMHCC Case Management, the PMHCC Information Services Department, the PMHCC Finance/Administration Department and the Legal and Compliance Officer
• Gather requirements for new enhancements as needed, from the above entities as they pertain to business processes, data collection and reporting and communicating this information to the Programming team so they may code the information system application
• Perform User Acceptance Testing (UAT) of all application changes, fixes or enhancements and involve staff in the Case Management department in UAT as needed
• Act as the first point of contact for any information system application issues or problems; investigate if it is a system wide issue or specific to a user and communicate/create tickets for the Programming team to investigate and fix or provide recommendations to issues.
• Set priorities based on input and feedback from Case Management executive team on any new enhancements to the information system application and communicate/manage the priorities with the Programming team
• Organize data generated and manipulate data received through research into reports that is easily readable and demonstrates findings legibly
• Distribute and monitor data analysis projects; support staff in overcoming barriers in their projects and review the accuracy and reliability of data analysis projects
• Conduct analytical and statistical research; make recommendations on data collection and analysis methods to ensure data is reliable and understandable; synthesize and interpret information, translate quantitative and qualitative data into visuals and reports for varying audiences
• Prepare comprehensive reports, graphs and tables; track and report on key performance indicators for the department: using an array of reporting tools including business intelligence applications
• Support ad-hoc analytic requests; providing accurate and timely data, analysis and insightful interpretations
• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
• Identify and gather appropriate information to remove gaps in data (missing, incomplete, inaccurate, etc.)
• Provide continued training to Case Management staff on the information System Application, new features and/or enhancements
• Train the executive team on the use of any ad-hoc reporting tools of business intelligence tools
• Initiate research projects that are data-driven, which directly address questions from Case Management staff and external partners

Skills Required:
• Ability to translate complicated data into useful information
• Advanced experience with SQL; authoring pipelines via SQL
• Advanced understanding of Excel
• Advanced understanding of queries and data tables
• Excellent quantitative and data analysis skills
• Advanced understanding of data management and storage infrastructures
• Ability to initiate and drive projects to completion with minimal guidance
• Ability to build key data sets to empower operation and exploratory analysis
• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze and disseminate significant amounts of information
• Extremely strong attention to detail and accuracy
• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing large data-sets (Excel, SAS, SPSS)
• Excellent written and verbal communication skills with the ability to collaborate and work with others; share information in a clear arid concise manner
• Ability to prioritize and respond to requests with speed and agility
• Proficiency in critical thinking and usage of problem-solving skills
• Ability to perform complex statistical analysis
• Proficiency in using computer software packages to manage and produce data such as tables, maps and/or graphic displays
• Excellent written analysis and oral presentation skills
• Ability to write queries to extract data for reporting or information requests
• Experience with Microsoft Power BI is a plus

Education and Experience:
• Bachelors decree in Information Management, Statistics, or a related field of study is required
• Experience in a technical field performing data analytics, modeling and statistical analyses
• Familiarity with health data, HIPAA is a plus
• Familiarity with social work or case management organizations is a plus
• At least two (2) years or experience with SQL database queries and reporting
• At least two (2) years or experience in a technical field performing data analytics, reporting, modeling and statistical analyses

Equal Opportunity Employment:
PMHCC, Inc. is committed to equal opportunity. It is our policy to support equal employment for all employees and applicants without regard to race, religion, color, sex, sexual preferences, age, national origin, disability, behavioral health status, military status or any other characteristic protected by law.

Americans with Disabilities Act:
Employees as well as applicants who are currently, or become disabled, must be able to perform the functions of the job with either reasonable accommodation or unaided. PMHCC, Inc. will examine reasonable accommodations on a case by case basis in accordance with the law.,The
Tumor Registrars are responsible for the abstracting and reporting to State and
National registries, including the American College of Surgeons Commission on
Cancer, in accordance with all mandated standards and guidelines. They monitor
and update follow-up information for all patients in our facilities database.
They perform lifetime follow-up on all patients with a diagnosis of malignancy
who received treatment at our facility, continually monitoring medical record
documentation for our facility to assure timely collection of all relevant
data. They assist with the development of the Cancer Program's Annual Report
and generate requested reports for use in research and cancer related studies.

Minimum required qualifications for consideration:
Tumor Registrar certification (Certified Tumor Registrar, CTR).
3 years' of experience abstracting cancer data and reportable conditions.
General experience in the use of Tumor Registry (Oncolog, Metriq) .and EMR (Epic) software systems.
Associates Degree in a health care related field. A Health Information Management (HIM) major or focus is preferred.
Location: Temple University Hospital, 3509 N Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140. A residence in the Philadelphia area is required. Some remote work may be approved but nothing more than 8 hours per week is likely.

Typical schedule: M-F, 40 hrs/wk, 8:00a-4:30p. Non-exempt, overtime eligible.,Tandigm Health, LLC is a value-based population health organization. We engage our physician network by aligning economics and rewarding them for the value of the care they provide rather than for the volume of services. We enable our physicians with innovative tools, actionable data, expert training and education, and clinical delivery support. We empower our physicians by building community-oriented care delivery systems that facilitate collaboration across the continuum of care.

At Tandigm, you will find a culture where all Teammates have the opportunity to collaborate in an energized, multi-disciplinary work environment focused on improving patient outcomes and enabling our staff to do some of the most rewarding work of their careers.

SUMMARY

The Tandigm Health Data Analyst works with on a variety of projects with stakeholders from across the company to help them answer critical business questions and build information assets to support their operational needs. They analyze medical and pharmaceutical claims data sets to discover pattern, test assumptions, and uncover new opportunities. The Data Analyst gathers requirements; designs new reporting packages; creates technical specification documents; helps write the necessary SQL code; and deploys and maintains these assets. They are responsible for insuring data quality and appropriate data use to comply with HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) regulations.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS

· Consistently exhibits behavior and communication skills that demonstrate Tandigms commitment to superior customer service, including quality, care, and concern with each and every internal and external customer.

· Apply critical thinking skills to analyze large data sets to detect patterns and identify trends.

· Work closely with colleagues to understand their objectives, refine requirements, and design reports/dashboards that provide them the business insight to support their goals.

· Write, deploy and maintain SQL code and other database objects.

· Identify data issues and work with various partners and vendors to resolve these issues.

· Comply with HIPPA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) regulations when using and reporting PHI (Protected Health Information).

· Performs additional duties as assigned.

EDUCATION:

· Bachelors degree in Computer Science, Epidemiology, Information Management, Mathematics, Statistics or related field

EXPERIENCE:

· Demonstrated experience querying databases with SQL

· Demonstrated experience writing database stored procedures

· Demonstrated skills in SSIS, SSRS

KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, ABILITIES:

· Health care industry background desirable

· Experience in data modeling (Enterprise Architect preferred)

· Familiarity with databases (SQL Server preferred)

· Experience designing and building charts/dashboards/reports with data visualization software (Tableau preferred)

· Experience applying statistical analysis to large datasets with BI software desirable (R preferred)

· Ability to work independently on various simultaneous initiatives.

· Ability to produce high quality work products on time.

· Excellent written and verbal communication skills.

Tandigm Health is an Equal Opportunity Employer (EOE),LOC_COLKET-Colket Translational Research Req ID: 64961

Shift: Days

Employment Status: Regular - Full Time
Job Summary
Thank you for your interest in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the recruitment process for this position has been placed ON HOLD. If you would still like to be considered for the role, you may apply to this position. When the status of the position returns to active, and if your resume is selected for a department interview, you will be notified. Thank you for considering CHOP. Our appreciation is sincere, knowing your talent is very valued.

The senior data analyst is passionate about healthcare delivery in a patient care setting. A successful candidate is articulate, analytical, and a team player who understands the power of data in clinical settings. The analyst enjoys coordinating with interdisciplinary teams to create end to end solutions for improving operational and clinical decision making. S/he learns quickly, works independently, and is relentless in overcoming technical, process, and organizational obstacles.

The senior analyst will join the Analytics and Reporting team in the Center for Healthcare Quality and Analytics and will be responsible for empowering users with data across the institution, providing a unique blend of clinical, technical, and analytical expertise. The team works with multiple groups within the organization to improve clinical quality, improve patient safety and streamline operations. The team combines business knowledge with technology to empower decision makers and believes that analytics and data can improve outcomes, optimize processes, and reduce costs. The team is looking for creative problem solvers who are excited about joining a collaborative team with a big impact.

The senior data analyst will be staffed to lead high-profile projects and will be a reliable expert in translating clinical and business requirements into meaningful analysis. The individual will need to build relationships with key stakeholders, be an expert in multiple data sources, and implement sustainable solutions. S/he should bring project management experience and share best practices with the team. The analyst must be comfortable with mentorship and leading team development and skill development efforts.
Job Responsibilities
1. Individual Contributor
Guides clinical teams and business stakeholders on large scope projects: gathering requirements, developing metrics, retrieving data, and ensuring validity of results
Utilizes advanced analytical and/or statistical ability to evaluate data, and make judgments and recommendations regarding process and outcome improvement work, including: resource utilization, physician practice patterns, and clinical pathway effectiveness.
Proposes and creates innovative and appropriate data solutions (dashboards, reports, business intelligence tools, etc) for the measurement of processes and outcomes
Advises on new data models, testing frameworks, and documentation practices
Demonstrates excellent presentation and communication skills to share findings in an understandable and actionable manner tailored to audience and customer's needs
2. Project Management
Responsible for the coordination and completion of assigned projects, including project definition, assignment of task responsibilities, setting deadlines, and all other aspects of project management.
Independently identifies and works to remediate project obstacles
3. Leadership
Identifies, defines, and implements new data-driven strategies and processes for the organization.
Communicates work plans, progress, findings and interpretations effectively with a continual focus on educating and developing analytic capability of business customers and the organization overall.
Trains and mentors team members
Develops a “trusted advisor” reputation through expertise in data
Required Education and Experience
Required Education:

Bachelor’s degree

Required Experience:

Five (5) years of experience in analytics / business intelligence
Preferred Education, Experience & Cert/Lic
Preferred Education:

Master’s degree in biostatistics, epidemiology, health services research, economics, quantitative science

Preferred Experience:

Six (6) years of experience in analytics / business intelligence
Additional Technical Requirements
Experience in at least one computer programming language or analytical programming language (R, Python, SAS, etc)
Experience with data visualization tools preferred (Tableau, Qlik, etc)
Experience with SQL
Knowledge of relational database structures
Understanding of data flows, conceptual knowledge of ETL
Experience in project management

All CHOP employees who work in a patient building or who provide patient care are required to receive an annual influenza vaccine unless they are granted a medical or religious exemption.

Children's Hospital of Philadelphia is committed to providing a safe and healthy environment for its patients, family members, visitors and employees. In an effort to achieve this goal, employment at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, other than for positions with regularly scheduled hours in New Jersey, is contingent upon an attestation that the job applicant does not use tobacco products or nicotine in any form and a negative nicotine screen (the latter occurs after a job offer).

Children's Hospital of Philadelphia is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, religion, national or ethnic origin, disability or protected veteran status.

VEVRAA Federal Contractor/Seeking priority referrals for protected veterans. Please contact our hiring official with any referrals or questions.

CHOP Careers Contact

Talent Acquisition

2716 South Street, 6th Floor

Philadelphia, PA 19146

Phone: 866-820-9288

Email:TalentAcquisition@email.chop.edu,Position Summary:

The Behavioral Health and Justice Related Services (BHJRS) Unit seeks to reduce stigma, increase behavioral health awareness across systems, strengthen community and cross-system capacity, support recovery and resilience, and increase early intervention and access to behavioral health services. To fill this position, BHJRS seeks qualified candidates who are passionate about making Philadelphia’s behavioral health and justice systems more efficient and effective in responding to individuals with mental health issues and substance abuse disorders.

To assist in accomplishing these goals, BHJRS has developed the new and important position of Research and Information Analyst. In this position, the Information Analyst will be responsible for researching, collecting data and performing statistical analysis needed to monitor trends and patterns. Responsibility for the design, implementation and maintenance of computer-based management information systems necessary for the evaluation and analysis of ongoing programs or trends is an important aspect of the work. Experience with SQL databases and analysis software is required.

The Information Analyst is also required to have an advanced understanding of the function and
utilization of queries and data tables. This position will take primary responsibility for “getting the data right,” managing and preparing data from various contributors for a variety of web applications, reports, graphs, charts, and other pertinent documentation. Candidates must be able to organize raw data, produce actionable insights, and effectively communicate this new information through data visualizations and messaging.

Duties and Responsibilities:
 Conduct analytical and statistical research; make recommendations on data collection and analysis methods to ensure data is reliable and understandable; synthesize and interpret information, translate quantitative and qualitative data into visuals and reports for varying audiences
 Design research questions and projects; prepare comprehensive reports, graphs and tables; track and report on key performance indicators for programs and projects
 Design and construct computer files and analytical processes and output reports for research projects
 Design new or recommend modifications to current systems and programs, based on assessed needs using query languages, report writers, interactive database programs, spreadsheets and/or application generators; performs related duties which include quality assurance of computer databases, designing source and output documents, developing schedules for the input of data, and testing new programs
 Design and improve the process by which data is collected and stored to identify, track, and monitor all individuals served by the behavioral health system in Philadelphia (including those hospitalized, incarcerated, and in the community) using Microsoft SQL Server, Qlik Sense, R, and Excel.
 Consult with various departments (internal and external) to understand the sources of incoming raw data and address the administrative, clinical, and legal needs of forensic individuals
 Determine database structural requirements by analyzing and programming multiple sources of data, configuring the operationalization of such data, and determine the optimal presentation, and evaluation systems via SQL, Qlik Sense, R, and Excel.
 Transform various incoming data sources into usable and compatible format for SQL importing
 Follow database architectural and design projects to completion and provide continued training and support regarding functionality
 Analyze the reporting needs in and between several departments (internal and external) and develop the most efficient methods to utilize the current data, identifying additional needs, and building additional reporting by collecting raw data and translating the information to IS for standardized and novel reporting purposes
 Provide data and graphics for projects in an efficient and timely manner and present information in a succinct and creative manner
 Initiate research projects that are data-driven, which directly address incoming questions from internal staff and external partners
 Serve as a liaison between the clinical/administrative/justice partners and the Data Unit for all research, data, and database needs
 Possess an understanding of specific data-driven questions and build and manipulate queries in SQL to answer such questions

Skills Required:
 Conducting research projects and determining appropriate research methods utilizing current research techniques
 Performing complex statistical analysis
 Using computer software packages to manage and produce data such as tables, maps and/or graphic displays
 Written analysis and oral presentation
 Ability to translate complicated data into useful information
 Advanced experience with SQL databases
 Advanced understanding of R and Excel
 Advanced understanding of queries and data tables
 Excellent quantitative and data analysis skills
 Understanding of data management and storage infrastructures
 Ability to initiate and drive projects to completion with minimal guidance
 Ability to build key data sets to empower operation and exploratory analysis
 Ability to write queries to extract data for reporting or information requests
 Extremely strong attention to detail and accuracy
 Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing large data-sets (Excel, SAS, SPSS, R)
 Excellent written and verbal communication skills with the ability to collaborate and work with others; share information in a clear and concise manner
 Ability to effectively communicate theoretical and analytical concepts and findings, both orally and in writing
 Ability to prioritize and respond to requests with speed and agility
 Proficiency in critical thinking and usage of problem-solving skills

Education and Experience:
Familiarity with health data is a plus.
All candidates must have the following:
 Bachelor’s Degree in Information Management, Computer Science, Statistics, Criminology, Criminal Justice, Psychology, Public Health, Sociology or a related field of study.
 At least one year of experience in a technical field performing data analytics, modeling, and statistical analyses
 At least one year of experience producing detailed data-driven reports and analyses, which has included utilizing a database program and spreadsheets for information reporting and analysis
 At least one year of experience acquiring and using data in various formats (JSON, XML, CSV, Excel, etc.) from various sources (APIs, files downloaded from the web, hand- curated data-sets, packages of scripts, etc)
 At least one year of experience using SQL databases
 At least one year of experience with R and Excel
 At least one year of experience checking data for accuracy at both individual data point and summary level
Ability to travel throughout Philadelphia on foot or public transportation.

Equal Opportunity Employment:
PMHCC, Inc. is committed to equal opportunity. It is our policy to support equal employment for all employees and applicants without regard to race, religion, color, sex, sexual preferences, age, national origin, disability, behavioral health status, military status or any other characteristic protected by law.

Americans with Disabilities Act:
Employees as well as applicants who are currently, or become disabled, must be able to perform the functions of the job with either reasonable accommodation or unaided. PMHCC, Inc. will examine reasonable accommodations on a case by case basis in accordance with the law.

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $54,086.00 per year

Experience:
SQL databases, R and Excel: 1 year (Required)
checking data for accuracy: 1 year (Required)
performing data analytics, modeling, and statistical analyse: 1 year (Required)
using data in various formats (JSON, XML, CSV, etc.): 1 year (Required)
producing detailed data-driven reports and analyses: 1 year (Required)
Education:
Bachelor's (Required)
Work Location:
One location
Benefits:
Health insurance
Dental insurance
Vision insurance
Retirement plan
Paid time off
Tuition reimbursement,Position Summary:

The Senior Healthcare Data Analyst is responsible for providing analysis and recommendations regarding the Utilization and Cost of Behavioral Health Services at Community Behavioral Health.This position will provide analysis of based on Budget to Actual utilization and PMPM of services as well as coordinate with various departments including Finance, Data Informatics, Clinical and Provider Network Management in the determination of recommendations regarding Utilization and Cost findings.

Essential Functions:

·Coordinate with various CBH teams and departments through effective communication, report generation, solution development and team building.

·Provide or work with various departments to provide, and present various complex financial analyses and reports to Utilization Management Committee, the Clinical, Finance and Network Operations Departments.

·Maintain, modify and create SQL code used for financial analysis and reports.

·Identify, research and bring to resolution any issues with the financial data and reports.

·Develop detailed financial projections.

·Review monthly Quality Assurance Reports prior to issuance to Finance Executive Staff.

·Coordinate the processing of compliance claims adjustments and reporting results to the Compliance Department.

·Development of Value Based Contracting Models and Evaluation of Value Based Contracting.

Position Requirements:

·Education: Bachelor’s degree in Finance, Accounting, Economics or Mathematics

·License/Certification: N/A

·Relevant Work Experience: Minimum of 5 years of experience in financial forecasting and analysis

·Skills:

·Extensive knowledge of Microsoft Office applications

·Proficient in using SQL, including querying and troubleshooting

·Thorough understanding of data manipulations and reconciliation

·Excellent analytical skills

·Excellent interpersonal and verbal and written communication skills

·Able to work independently,Short Description

Work with business leaders to establish operational performance requirements and metrics for the assigned business unit.

Define and analyze the functional specifications necessary to translate data into meaningful and actionable information.

Develop and deploy tools and dashboards necessary for the timely and reliable access to this business information.

Special Requirements
Education:

Masters degree in Engineering or Analytical discipline.
Experience:

Minimum of 5 years of progressive business experience in a healthcare and/or a minimum of 5 years managing the delivery of Business Intelligence Data Warehousing solutions.

Experience in business process modeling and analysis. Knowledgeable in areas of business process improvement /redesign /re-engineering.

Experience in managing projects through the development lifecycle (defining requirements and functional specifications; as well as coordinating the development, testing, implementation and maintenance of business intelligence solutions).
Required License/Certifications/ Registration:

Certification in Business Intelligence tools and Project Management (desirable).
Other Qualifications:

Understanding of performance requirements with demonstrated expertise in developing Key Performance Indicators for business units.

Knowledgeable in Information Systems (definition /analysis of business process requirements and design/integration of Business Intelligence solutions)

Exceptional communication skills; ability to work independently and drive for results.

Critical thinker with strong research and analytical skills

Advanced computer skills in Microsoft software; expertise in Excel and Access

Advanced proficiency in reporting software systems (e.g., Business Objects, Crystal)

Proficiency in the application of data visualization tools

Knowledge of Databases and query reporting,Certified Tumor Registrar/Data Analyst [CTR and experience required] - ( 192846 ) Description The Tumor Registrars are responsible for the abstracting and reporting to State and National registries, including the American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer, in accordance with all mandated standards and guidelines. They monitor and update follow-up information for all patients in our facilities database. They perform lifetime follow-up on all patients with a diagnosis of malignancy who received treatment at our facility, continually monitoring medical record documentation for our facility to assure timely collection of all relevant data. They assist with the development of the Cancer Program's Annual Report and generate requested reports for use in research and cancer related studies. Minimum required qualifications for consideration : Tumor Registrar certification (Certified Tumor Registrar, CTR). 3 years' of experience abstracting cancer data and reportable conditions. General experience in the use of Tumor Registry (Oncolog, Metriq) .and EMR (Epic) software systems. Associates Degree in a health care related field. A Health Information Management (HIM) major or focus is preferred. Location : Temple University Hospital, 3509 N Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140. A residence in the Philadelphia area is required. Some remote work may be approved but nothing more than 8 hours per week is likely. Typical schedule : M-F, 40 hrs/wk, 8:00a-4:30p. Non-exempt, overtime eligible. Your Tomorrow is Here! Temple Health is a dynamic network of outstanding hospitals, specialty centers, and physician practices that is advancing the fight against disease, pushing the boundaries of medical science, and educating future healthcare professionals. Temple Health consists of Temple University Hospital (TUH), Fox Chase Cancer Center, Jeanes Hospital, TUH-Episcopal Campus, TUH-Northeastern Campus, Temple Physicians, Inc., and Temple Transport Team. Temple Health is proudly affiliated with the Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University. To support this mission, Temple University Health System is continuously recruiting top talent to join its diverse, 10,000 strong workforce that fosters a healthy, safe and productive environment for its patients, visitors, students and colleagues alike. At Temple Health, your tomorrow is here! Tomorrow is Here! Temple University Hospital's Cancer Center is home to some of the area's top cancer specialists, dedicated to diagnosing, treating and managing nearly all types of cancer including brain and spinal, breast, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, gynecological, hematologic, head and neck, and lung. You have exceptional cancer care - advanced technology and diagnosis, the latest cancer treatments, cutting-edge cancer research and clinical trials - close to home. Primary Location : Pennsylvania-Philadelphia Job : Operational Admin & Management Schedule : Full-time Shift : Day Job Employee Status : Regular,UCSD Layoff from Career Appointment: Apply by 07/10/20 for
consideration with preference for rehire. All layoff applicants should
contact their Employment Advisor.
Special Selection Applicants: Apply by 07/20/20. Eligible Special
Selection clients should contact their Disability Counselor for
assistance.
DESCRIPTION
===========
The Department of Family Medicine and Public Health has approximately
100 salaried faculty and is comprised of seven divisions: Behavioral
Medicine, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Epidemiology, Family
Medicine, Global Health, Health Policy, and Preventive Medicine. Our
mission is to improve Public Health through preventive, behavioral,
epidemiologic and clinical research, education and clinical care. Our
patient care is provided at several locations across the county as
well as through multiple initiatives with the medically under-served
in our community and includes training of over 60 residents and
fellows.
With over $125 million in research grants and contracts, our
award-winning faculty conduct innovative Public Health research at the
intersection of behavioral and medical sciences to assess and
understand chronic disease etiology, improve human health, and prevent
disease at the individual and population level.
The staff member will serve as the statistician or data analyst for
multiple grant funded studies and will use skills as a seasoned,
experienced research professional with a full understanding of
in-depth statistical analyses and research software programming
techniques. Responsibilities may include: performing statistical
analyses, providing data management, analyzing datasets for
performance of algorithms, processing and preparing device
(accelerometer, GPS, GIS, ActivPal) data for analysis and machine
learned algorithms, developing programming protocols for computing
data in the cloud or other systems, manuscript and presentation
preparation, developing and implementing data security policies and
procedures, managing data use policies, and providing work direction
for staff and interns for several studies. This individual will work
closely with the research team and co-investigators.
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS
======================
A Bachelor's Degree in related area; and/or equivalent
experience/training.
Three (3) years of related experience in statistical analysis of
data in research studies, and computational tools and statistical
programming languages.
Thorough knowledge of research function.
Proven skills associated with statistical analysis and systems
programming.
Demonstrated skills in analysis and consultation.
Excellent skills to communicate complex information in a clear and
concise manner both verbally and in writing.
Strong skills in project management.
Research skills at a level to evaluate alternate solutions and
develop recommendations.
Proficient in R programming language.
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS
========================
Master's Degree in biostatistics, statistics, or related area;
and/or equivalent experience/training is preferred.
Experience with processing data from devices such as
accelerometers, ActivPals, and device data.
Experience working with big data.
Experience with cloud computing services (such as AWS cloud).
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
==================
Employment is subject to a criminal background check.,Under general supervision, this position exists to assist the organization in making strategic data-related decisions by analyzing, manipulating, tracking, internally managing and reporting data. This position functions both as a senior analyst and as a high-level SAS programmer.

Essential Functions:

- Designs and enhances databases.
Designs menu systems that are effective and user-friendly.
Develops reports with accurate, easy to read, useful information.
Designs and generates tracking and monitoring tools.
Participates in the development of outcomes and process measures, including technical specifications, to enable population measurement, guideline implementation, and evaluation.
Tests complex statistical SAS routines using macros, vendor software, and software written by self and others.
Tests and maintains data integrity.
May assist with sophisticated statistical models and forecasting tools using these databases.
Assists with the definition of complex multi-dimensional healthcare issues and develops time tables/processes for decision making.
May translate needs, issues, and ideas into effective strategies and action plans.
May formulate specific implementation plans and evaluates the effectiveness of actions/programs implemented.
Develops creative alternative solutions.
May assist in the determination of goals and priorities with team, clients, or project management sponsors.
May communicate results/recommendations to project sponsors, clients, and various senior level audiences (including physicians for TPMG departments).

Basic Qualifications:
Experience
N/A.

Education
Bachelor of arts degree in economics, finance, health care administration, public health administration, statistics, mathematics, operations research, OR four (4) years of experience in a directly related field required.
High School Diploma or General Education Development (GED) required.
License, Certification, Registration
N/A.
Additional Requirements:
Experience with analytical manipulation and interpretation of large databases required.
Broad familiarity with medical practices, especially population management and process and outcomes measurement.
Microsoft Office skills required.
Strong analytic and critical thinking skills, writing skills, communication skills, consulting skills, and ability to work within a team.
Ability to express complex analytical and technical information to senior management or to audiences with clinical training.
Must be an independent self-starter.
Must be able to work in a Labor/Management Partnership environment.

Preferred Qualifications:

- Minimum three (3) years of experience in SAS preferred.

- Minimum two (2) years of related analytical consulting experience, healthcare experience preferred.
Experience with SQL, macros, AF, and SASGRAPH, PROC Report and statistical procedures in SAS preferred.
Project management experience preferred.
Experience with MVS/TSO operating systems preferred.

- Master's degree preferred.

- Knowledge of JCL strongly preferred.

Kaiser Permanente is an equal opportunity employer committed to a diverse and inclusive workforce. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), age, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, parental status, ancestry, disability, gender identity, veteran status, genetic information, other distinguishing characteristics of diversity and inclusion, or any other protected status.
External hires must pass a background check/drug screen. Qualified applicants with arrest and/or conviction records will be considered for employment in a manner consistent with federal and state laws, as well as applicable local ordinances, including but not limited to the San Francisco and Los Angeles Fair Chance Ordinances.,This position will remain open until filled.
UCSD Layoff from Career Appointment: Apply by 03/11/2020 for
consideration with preference for rehire. All layoff applicants should
contact their Employment Advisor.
Special Selection Applicants: Apply by 03/13/2020. Eligible Special
Selection clients should contact their Disability Counselor for
assistance.
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have impacted UC San Diego Campus
hiring. Our Campus will continue to recruit for essential positions
and we ask for your understanding and patience with our application
process during this unprecedented time. For more information regarding
steps we are taking to keep applicants and staff safe during this
time, please click here.
DESCRIPTION
===========
Reporting to the Division Business Office (DBO), the Division of
Biological Sciences (DoBS) Data and Financial Analyst will use skills
as a seasoned, experienced professional with a full understanding of
industry practices and organizational policies and procedures to
resolve a wide range of issues in imaginative as well as practical
ways. The incumbent will implement and administer data-based systems,
and manage and develop data practices to support diverse divisional
needs for data and reports. This includes determining needs and
building, customizing, and enhancing reporting from new and existing
campus systems, including UC Path and Oracle Financial.
Provide strategic planning, resource management, and reporting tools
for DoBS Dean's Office and Business Office administrative units
(Student Instructional Services, Fiscal, Academic Personnel & Human
Resources, Computing Services, Shops, and Safety). Compile information
from multiple data sources and formats to produce customized and
standard reports, statistical analyses, and graphical representations
of data to meet business operational needs. Produce reports,
dashboards, and other data analysis tools for policy and operational
requirements based on an analysis of existing data and sources, and an
evaluation of the needs of and impact to different units/leadership.
Partner with DoBS leadership, managers, and staff in the development,
testing, and implementation of ad hoc reports and reporting tools.
Partner with the DoBS Dean's office, CFO, and Core Operations Analyst
to provide and analyze financial reports for compliance with federal,
state, and UC regulations. Synthesize data, prepare formal and
informal presentations, reports, and statistical analyses using
spreadsheets, charts, and other graphical displays that summarize
complex concepts in ways that are understandable to various audiences.
Provide analysis and reports to the Dean, Associate Deans, Assistant
Dean, and senior management within various units including financial,
personnel and academics to facilitate the strategic planning efforts.
Occasional evenings and weekends may be required.
QUALIFICATIONS
==============
Graduation from college with a major in business administration,
economics, statistics, educational administration, computer
science or an allied field and two (2) years of experience in
administrative analysis or operations research; or an equivalent
combination of education and experience.
Demonstrated report development capabilities using Cognos and
other Business Intelligence Reporting tools.
Thorough knowledge of databases, database design and management.
Demonstrated experience in SQL, Access, and Excel.
Substantial experience developing and maintaining database systems
using appropriate software applications in order to conduct data
analytics, e.g., perform statistical sampling, data mining,
statistical analyses, correlational studies, etc. and provide
summarization of data report and make recommendations.
Familiarity in projecting salary, benefits, and accruals, indirect
costs with knowledge of payroll and personnel regulations
including the impact of salaries, merits, range adjustments,
social security cap and accompanied benefit costs and leaves where
applicable.
Strong analytical and data modeling background. General knowledge
in data collection and analysis techniques, statistics or social
science research techniques. Solid knowledge of common computer
application programs.
Strong skills in analyzing, researching and synthesizing large
amounts of data for preparing sound and relevant proposals and
analyses. Skill in independently researching, compiling,
organizing, interpreting and selecting data and materials from
various sources.
Proven ability to download, merge, manipulate, analyze and report
on large amounts of complex data from various campus and
departmental sources. Ability to design and generate reports using
spreadsheets, pivot tables and statistical tools.
Proficiency in organizing and reporting data with strong attention
to detail and accuracy and ability to solve complex methodology.
Ability to identify, synthesize and distribute critical sources of
data and information.
Demonstrated budgetary management skills with ability to analyze
financial operating data to determine costs, remain within budget
and ensure cost-effectiveness.
Proven knowledge of federal, state and private contract and grant
regulations with the skill and ability to read, comprehend,
interpret and execute, including the regulations of novel and/or
unique agencies or programs.
Demonstrated ability to perform and participate in internal audits
of procedures to ensure compliance to campus, system-wide, state
and federal policies and standards.
Proven ability to accurately interpret and implement policies and
procedures and effectively communicate and disseminate
information. Skill in writing procedures, guidelines and
application documentation.
Ability to think strategically and creatively, to anticipate
Business and Financial trends and to transfer that thinking into
Divisional Business needs. Knowledge of organizational principles
and procedures involved in handling sensitive data.
Exceptional interpersonal and verbal and written communication
skills. Demonstrated ability to communicate technical information
to technical and non-technical personnel at various levels in the
organization.
Strong ability to present information in a clear concise manner
verbally and in writing. Ability to present well-organized, clear,
informative presentations, both in one-on-one situations and in
group settings. Ability to respond well to rapid questioning on
difficult issues.
Extensive organizational, analysis and decision-making skills to
continually prioritize between long and short term needs,
competing demands and constant requests for priority changes from
a variety of sources, keep track of ongoing projects and tasks
simultaneously, and meet multiple concurrent deadlines.
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS
========================
Knowledge of financial, admissions, enrollment, academic
personnel, human resources, space and contracts and grant awards
data.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
==================
Job offer is contingent upon a satisfactory clearance based on
background check results.,This is a UC San Diego Internal Recruitment open to UCSD and UCSD
Health System Staff Only
UCSD Layoff from Career Appointment: Apply by 7/2/20 for consideration
with preference for rehire. All layoff applicants should contact their
Employment Advisor.
Special Selection Applicants: Apply by 7/7/20. Eligible Special
Selection clients should contact their Disability Counselor for
assistance.
DESCRIPTION
===========
UCSD Health Sciences is a $1 billion dollar plus organization
encompassing 16 academic departments (14 clinical, 2 basic sciences),
2 pre-academic/hospital departments, 2 professional schools (School of
Medicine and Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences), 2
hospitals, and various other programs and units all dedicated towards
fulfilling the Health Sciences missions. The Department of Medicine at
UC San Diego is a leading center for clinical care, research, and
teaching. We are dedicated to translating laboratory discoveries into
better methods to detect, prevent and treat disease.
Under general supervision, the researcher will oversee lab operations
of a molecular cell biology laboratory, will be responsible for
biological research experiments and sequencing data management and
analysis. Incumbent will play multiple roles in assay development,
automation, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), NGS data analysis.
Incumbent will also participate in authoring and preparing manuscripts
for publication of data.
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS
======================
Advanced theoretical knowledge of biology, cell biology, or
molecular biology typically attained by a Bachelor's Degree.
Related fields may include biochemistry.
Proven experience in sterile procedures and cell culture
techniques.
Demonstrated experience, skill and knowledge of research design
and methodology to achieve experimental goals.
Proven hands-on skills with molecular biology techniques and NGS
library preparation, including mRNA-seq, small RNA-seq, total
RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, CLIP-seq, ATAC-seq.
Strong experience with operating NGS sequencers and evaluating
sequencing qualities.
Advanced skill for NGS data analysis. Experience processing raw
data from NGS experiments.
Demonstrated skill and experience in developing new assay,
especially NGS libraries.
Demonstrated skill and experience in programming and operating
liquid handling instruments. Application of multiple bioinformatic
packages using different programming languages such as R, Python,
Bash for the analysis of NGS data.
Extensive knowledge of statistical analysis methods and models,
mathematical and computational algorithm, such as machine learning
algorithms.
Experience with development of high-throughput assays for genetic
screens.
Enthusiasm for learning and a genuine interest in scientific
research. Willingness and ability to learn new skills, research
methods, and scientific principles.
Proven ability to operate and maintain of various lab equipment
such as centrifuges, spectrophotometers, and scintillation
counters.
Knowledge of radiation safety and biosafety techniques and
practices. Experience working with chemical, radioisotope, and
biological hazards and recognizing safety problems.
Strong communication skills (both verbal and written) to interact
professionally and effectively in the work environment, as well as
effectively and accurately document research procedures. Ability
to read, comprehend and discuss research materials.
PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS
========================
Demonstrated knowledge to read and use Material Safety Data
Sheets. Knowledge of UCSD Environmental Health and Safety
requirements and the ability to write with correct syntax and
grammar and to clearly communicate ideas and protocols in writing
to EH&S. Experienced in working and maintaining a sterile
environment.
Knowledge of and ability to use UCSD purchasing software and
procedures including on line applications.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
==================
Employment is subject to a criminal background check.
Must be willing to work with biohazardous, toxic materials, and
mice.
Occasional evenings and weekends may be required.,The Quality Data Analyst is responsible for supporting the quality program at all campuses. This role is responsible for the following:
Responsible for coordinating, and organizing quality data for assigned projects
Coordinate with departments for monthly Quality Assurance Performance Improvement meetings
Create and maintain dashboards and databases to assist operational and clinical leadership improve quality outcomes and patient safety
Provide coordination, support Sports Cohort Outcomes Registry (SCORE) initiatives. Ensure all activities are completed on time and maintain comprehensive documentation of SCORE activities
Coordinate SCORE activities including logistics to set up monthly/quarterly/annual meetings and audits
Prepare data-driven professional reports, summaries and documentation for team and leadership updates
Effectively responds to inquiries from SCORE participating institutions
Education / Requirements:
Bachelor’s Degree in Health Services Administration or related field, required. Master’s Degree in Health Services Administration, preferred
Two years experience managing healthcare projects and data required
Good working understanding of business tools
Strong organizational skills and interpersonal skills
Ability to determine appropriate course of action in complex situations
Ability to work independently, exercise creativity, and is attentive to detail
Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing,How will this role have an impact?


The Data Quality Analyst reports to the Director of Data Quality. The Data Quality Analyst is responsible for the data quality initiatives of the Data Management organization with respect to all healthcare data ingested and used by the organization in reporting use cases. The Data Quality Analyst will help establish the vision for data quality standards that are maintained by development teams within the Data Management organization.

The Data Quality Analyst is responsible for developing tests that can be automated and run routinely to proactively identify potential issues in reports, outputs, and other deliverables before they manifest as an incident with the business.

The Data Quality Analyst will be responsible for completing quality reviews of new development of and enhancements to reports, client deliverables, and miscellaneous outputs as needed.

The Data Quality Analyst will work closely with development teams and other leaders in the company to help formulate strategic healthcare data partnerships where new data must be ingested, processed and disseminated downstream into new and existing reporting or new and existing data contracts.

The Data Quality Analyst is expected to utilize available tools and software to improve accuracy and efficiency of data quality validations and initiatives.

What will you do?
Support the Director of Data Quality Management
Establish standards for Data Quality
Utilize available toolsets and standardize validations
Establish best practice standards for data quality initiatives
Investigate and resolve problems of data accuracy and availability
Participate in integral testing to identify problems early.
Identify opportunities to leverage existing or new tooling to enhance Data Quality
Develop and maintain data quality documentation.
We are looking for someone with:
Bachelor's degree in computer-related field or equivalent experience.
Master's degree in a computer-related field is a plus.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
3+ years of relevant experience in a report development, data science, business analytics, business intelligence or comparable data engineering role
Knowledge of SQL to write complex, highly-optimized queries across large volumes of data
Extensive experience in the Healthcare Industry, working with CMS or other healthcare-related agencies, strongly preferred.
Minimum of 2 years of experience in working with users to understand business processes and data quality-affecting requirements
About Us:

Signify Health is helping build the healthcare system we all want to experience by transforming the home into the healthcare hub. We coordinate care holistically across individuals' clinical, social, and behavioral needs so they can enjoy more healthy days at home. By building strong connections to primary care providers and community resources, we're able to close critical care and social gaps, as well as manage risk for individuals who need help the most. This leads to better outcomes and a better experience for everyone involved.

Our high-performance networks are powered by more than 9,000 mobile doctors and nurses covering every county in the U.S., 3,500 healthcare providers and facilities in value-based arrangements, and hundreds of community-based organizations. Signify's intelligent technology and decision-support services enable these resources to radically simplify care coordination for more than 1.5 million individuals each year while helping payers and providers more effectively implement value-based care programs.

To learn more about how we're driving outcomes and making healthcare work better, please visit us at www.signifyhealth.com.,How will this role have an impact?

This position will be responsible for fulfilling our internal departments, as well as external clients' needs from an analytics perspective and develop reporting to satisfy those needs. The candidate filling this position needs to have advanced technical abilities in order to mine data from multiple sources (SQL server and flat files) and transform that data into meaningful insight that will be consumed by individuals from various backgrounds.The candidate will work with the technology team, Client Services, and other business groups to gather information and understand any request. In addition, this position is responsible for supporting, identifying new solutions focusing on optimizing our current process to deliver data and insights to clients.

This role will also participate in the development of analytics strategy in collaboration with Client Services team.

This role will report to our Director, Customer Solutions.

What will you do?
Extending company's data with third party sources of information when needed
Enhancing data analysis procedures to include information that is relevant for building analytic systems
Doing ad-hoc analysis and presenting results in a clear manner
Partner with client, operations and other teams to drive understanding of our product offerings and services through data analysis.
Provide data, reports and insights that could be easily understood by non-technical individuals.
Work closely with Client Services to gather requirements and to develop solutions to fulfil clients' requests.
Proactively monitor, identify, and help our IT partners resolve system production issues.
Implementing automated solutions for recurring ad hoc data extraction.
We are looking for someone with:
Bachelor's degree in Math, Statistics or Computer Science or related field or equivalent work experience
Master's degree in Mathematics or technology preferred
5+ years professional experience (quantitative disciplines such as math, statistics, computer science, information systems preferred)
Experience with SQL Server, Reporting, and Data Cubes
Experience with Replication and ETL
Experience in statistical and data analysis (e.g. significance testing, regression modelling, factor analysis, etc.) or experience in machine learning, predictive or descriptive analytics, preferred
Experience using business intelligence tools (e.g. Tableau) and data frameworks
Demonstrated ability to develop and present business cases
Ability to rapidly assess, analyze and resolve complicated issues, and distill that complexity into simple and concise communication
About Us:

Signify Health is helping build the healthcare system we all want to experience by transforming the home into the healthcare hub. We coordinate care holistically across individuals' clinical, social, and behavioral needs so they can enjoy more healthy days at home. By building strong connections to primary care providers and community resources, we're able to close critical care and social gaps, as well as manage risk for individuals who need help the most. This leads to better outcomes and a better experience for everyone involved.

Our high-performance networks are powered by more than 9,000 mobile doctors and nurses covering every county in the U.S., 3,500 healthcare providers and facilities in value-based arrangements, and hundreds of community-based organizations. Signify's intelligent technology and decision-support services enable these resources to radically simplify care coordination for more than 1.5 million individuals each year while helping payers and providers more effectively implement value-based care programs.

To learn more about how we're driving outcomes and making healthcare work better, please visit us at www.signifyhealth.com.,Position Overview

The Healthcare Data Analyst supports the IT department and will work side by side with the production support team, development team, and solution consulting team to optimize and/or develop automated processes for importing healthcare industry claims and charge data, analyzing large data sets to optimize client experience and auditing for data integrity. The Healthcare Data Analyst will also be responsible for developing detailed report analysis and communicating analytic insights to management, consulting teams, and product teams. This position takes direction from the Data Management Manager.

Duties and Responsibilities
Extract, load and reconcile large data sets from multiple system platforms and sources.
Review data to determine operational impacts, trends and areas for improvement.
Utilize SQL or other advanced analytic tools to perform data extract and query functions.
Identify and troubleshoot data anomalies and irregularities.
Perform data quality audits.
Perform quantitative and/or qualitative data analysis and share results with internal and external customers.
Develop, collect and document business requirements for reporting and analysis initiatives with internal and external customers.
Ability to guide and communicate effectively with client IT to gather large data sets for importing.
Experience with developing, maintaining, monitoring, tuning/optimizing and troubleshooting SQL queries.
Become a data subject matter expert(SME) and understand various sources and applications of Vitalware data.
Establish best practices for data workflows.
Design, implement and enhance ETL processes.
Excellent logical and problem-solving abilities.
Monitor and troubleshoot data implementation issues through to resolution.
Guide our efforts in all areas of data performance and reliability.
Qualifications and Experience Requirements
Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or equivalent preferred.
4+ years of experience in an analytic role.
Proficiency in managing electronic medical records.
Model data using MS Excel, SQL, and/or other data analytical tools.
Experience with TSQL query language and stored procedures, jobs, etc.
Knowledge of ANSI X12 837 claim files highly desired.
Knowledge of healthcare claims data formats and concepts highly desired.
Skill and Ability Requirements
Enthusiastic about sharing knowledge and experience.
Passionate about learning.
Excellent communication written and verbal.
Strong presentation, interpersonal and consultative skills a must
Ability to manage multiple projects/tasks simultaneously.
Good judgment and decision-making skills.
Maintains a positive and results-oriented attitude.
Must be well organized, accurate and attentive to detail.
Ability to work independently and in a team environment.
Communicate effectively with technical and non-technical people.
Be proactive in keeping your skills up to date with the latest technologies.
Be thorough about all tasks and conduct tests as needed to ensure the job is well done.
Ability to work well under pressure and in a collaborative team environment.,Job Description
General Summary:

This position is responsible for understanding the current enterprise data model and providing support in helping maintain and improve it. This position will work with business and data analytics stakeholders to design, construct, test, optimize and deploy solutions, focusing specifically on back-end data integration. The company is looking for someone who is extremely sharp, detail-oriented, highly motivated, thrives in a fast-paced environment and able to work on multiple projects simultaneously.



RESPONSIBILITIES:
Analyze healthcare and financial data to design, model, develop and test integration scripts for the enterprise data warehouse (EDW) platform.
Implement, schedule, monitor and support all related processes and procedures.
Troubleshoot, repair and update the EDW as necessary.
Perform gap analysis on financial, operational and clinical data.
Develop ad-hoc reports, dashboards and simulations for the business as needed.


KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, and ABILITIES:
Strong in MS Excel
Experience (0-1 year) in MS SQL (basic querying and joins)
Financial modeling experience a plus
Healthcare RCM/claims knowledge a plus
Highly analytical
Passion for solving complex problems


EDUCATION/EXPERIENCE:
Bachelor’s degree in Finance, Mathematics, Computer Science, Engineering, or similar field.
0-1 years of experience in decision support/business analysis
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills with ability to interact at all levels of the organization,Job Description
JOB SUMMARY

We are looking for full time Claims Integration Engineer that will help us always stay 18 months ahead of the Industry. They will be working in an agile environment, developing and maintaining SQL databases and related back-end services. The ideal candidate would have development experience using Microsoft technologies and an insatiable appetite to learn and grow.

JOB RESPONSIBILITIES
Development of high quality database solutions
Develop, implement and optimize stored procedures and functions using T-SQL
Research required data
Gathering requirements and specifications from the end-users
Work in an agile development team environment
Prepare documentations and specifications
Interface with internal and external clients
QUALIFYING JOB KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS & ABILITIES:

Required skills:
Minimum 1 years’ experience as a SQL Developer or similar role
Good understanding of Microsoft SQL Server
Good understanding of T-SQL programming
Sense of ownership and pride in your performance and its impact on company’s success
Critical thinker and problem-solving skills
Team player
Good time-management skills
Great interpersonal and communication skills
Desired skills:
Knowledge of SQL and performance tuning
Working in an Agile environment
Git, SourceTree
Comfortable with documentation and creating infrastructure diagrams
Healthcare data experience such as:
Knowledge of claims data
Claims ETL
Commercial, Medicare, Medicaid and MSSP experience
Thrives in startup environment
EDUCATION
College or University degree in Computer Information Systems or a related discipline

Company Description
Lightbeam Health Solutions, Inc. is a Population Health Management software vendor. We provide a single platform that facilitates end-to-end population management. Our comprehensive tool set supports Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), payers, large provider groups, health systems and other healthcare organizations who aspire to provide superior care to their patients at a lower cost.,How will this role have an impact?

The Senior Data Quality Analyst reports to the Director of Data Quality. The Senior Data Quality Analyst is the sole point of contact responsible for the data quality initiatives of the Data Management organization with respect to all healthcare data ingested and used by the organization in reporting use cases. The Senior Data Quality Analyst will establish the vision for data quality standards that are maintained by development teams within the Data Management organization. The Senior Data Quality Analyst will also serve in a Data and Business Analyst capacity, assisting Data Management developers and business stakeholders understand business requirements for new data-related functionality.

The Senior Data Quality Analyst will be responsible for deep analysis into Signify products, applications, processes and resulting data. Process and data flow along with findings must be documented in order to communicate process breaks where fallout occurs.

The Senior Data Quality Analyst is responsible for developing tests that can be automated and run routinely to proactively identify potential issues in reports, outputs, and other deliverables before they manifest as an incident with the business.

The Senior Data Quality Analyst will be responsible for completing quality reviews of new development of and enhancements to reports, client deliverables, and miscellaneous outputs as needed.

The Senior Data Quality Analyst will work closely with other leaders in the company to help formulate strategic healthcare data partnerships where new data must be ingested, processed and disseminated downstream into new and existing reporting or new and existing data contracts.

The Senior Data Quality Analyst will also help formulate the strategy for what value lies in the new and existing data in order to achieve insightful solutions.

What will you do?
The Senior Data Quality Analyst will be responsible for deep analysis into Signify products, applications, processes and resulting data.
Process and data flow along with findings must be documented in order to communicate process breaks where fallout occurs.
The Senior Data Quality Analyst is responsible for developing tests that can be automated and run routinely to proactively identify potential issues in reports, outputs, and other deliverables before they manifest as an incident with the business.
Will work closely with other leaders in the company to help formulate strategic healthcare data partnerships where new data must be ingested, processed and disseminated downstream into new and existing reporting or new and existing data contracts.
We are looking for someone with:
High school diploma or equivalent.
Bachelor's degree in Healthcare related discipline, Management Information Systems, Computer Science or related field or equivalent work experience.
Master's degree in business or technology preferred
Healthcare experience is required; preferably within payer organizations and CMS; prior CI or nursing experience will be considered
Strong experience interfacing directly with members of executive and senior management
Self-driven able to identify data quality initiatives in the organization, work with the Directors of Data Management on prioritizing, and lead those initiatives while providing frequent updates on status
A minimum of 5 years of experience in the healthcare space with key positions in being accountable for high levels of data quality and accuracy.
A minimum of 5 years of experience in working with CMS or other healthcare-related agencies as it pertains to use of healthcare data
Minimum of 5 years of experience in working with users to understand business processes and data quality-affecting requirements
Has experience in reporting progress of team activities to leadership with clear and concise attention to work performed, value provided and initiatives completed
Has participated in client presentations and proposal development
Has demonstrated significant skill required to work effectively across internal functional areas in situations where clear parameters may not exist
About Us:

Signify Health is helping build the healthcare system we all want to experience by transforming the home into the healthcare hub. We coordinate care holistically across individuals' clinical, social, and behavioral needs so they can enjoy more healthy days at home. By building strong connections to primary care providers and community resources, we're able to close critical care and social gaps, as well as manage risk for individuals who need help the most. This leads to better outcomes and a better experience for everyone involved.

Our high-performance networks are powered by more than 9,000 mobile doctors and nurses covering every county in the U.S., 3,500 healthcare providers and facilities in value-based arrangements, and hundreds of community-based organizations. Signify's intelligent technology and decision-support services enable these resources to radically simplify care coordination for more than 1.5 million individuals each year while helping payers and providers more effectively implement value-based care programs.

To learn more about how we're driving outcomes and making healthcare work better, please visit us at www.signifyhealth.com.,Principal AccountabilityReporting to the Manager of Data Analytics, the Data Analyst is responsible for working with internal and external clients to design, develop, implement, and manage data ingestion and management workflows. The Data Analyst will always be looking for opportunities to standardize, automate, and deliver more expedient implementation of supply chain services.Works to understand corporate, external, and host hospital database sources (e.g. Medhost, Evident) and leverage gained understanding to provide deeper data utilization and development of new CHC analytic tools, while providing data flow diagrams and documentation of analysis tools, database structures, stored procedures, and data definitions.Works in direct contact with CHC corporate and facility end users, as well as with information analysis and data mining system vendors to ensure information stored in analytical systems is available timely, structured as appropriate, understandable, and accurate.Demonstrates expertise in a variety of generally accepted concepts, practices, and procedures, including cloud SQL and cloud ETL technologies.Strong written and verbal communications skills are required as this person will interact with both internal and external clients and must be able to translate complex technical concepts into easy to understand terms.EducationBachelor's degree or the equivalent education, certifications and related database analysis or management experience.Responsibilities* Responsible for supporting work environment focused on customer service, service management, and process improvement* Develops and manages data collection and measurement tools and processes* Interacts with internal and external clients to implement manageable data ETL processes* Develops strong understanding of client and corporate database structures, leveraging knowledge to standardize implementation of CHC tools* Supports development of new analytic tools; documenting process, structure, data elements* Plans and manages ETL process updates by maintaining, evaluating, and improving a transaction processing documentation and models* Monitors process performance using established metrics, evaluating and resolving processing and programming problems timely* Secures database by preparing and maintaining access control policies and procedures and implementing backup and disaster recovery procedures* Continually updates job knowledge by participating in educational opportunities, reading professional publications, maintaining personal networks and participating in professional organizations* Provides input to IT and supply chain strategic planning processes* Ability to travel Skills and Knowledge* Excellent interpersonal, communication, and analytical skills* The ability to interface effectively with internal and external clients* Ability to utilize Google Apps, Google Cloud Platform, and other database and analytical tools* Experience developing and managing data management processes* Experience resolving problems with positive outcomes* Experience prioritizing multiple activities and objectives in a rapidly changing environment, while delivering exceptional client service* Ability to communicate and relate well with othersCommunicates openly, respectfully, and timelyShares information appropriatelyKeeps others well informedEncourages others to share contrary viewsResponds in a timely manner to messages/requestsExpresses self well in writing* Ability to clearly communicate technical terms and applications to non-technical clients* Ability to listen and document the concerns, wants, and needs of clients* Possess a strong customer and service to others orientation* Requires independent analysis, communication and problem solving skillsExperience* 3+ years of Database Management experience* 3+ years leveraging SQL, ETL processes, and related technologies to develop analytical solutions* Experience with Google technologies including Cloud Dataflow, Dataproc, Pub/Sub, and Data Fusion a plus* Experience with business process management tools a plus* Data Maintenance, Decision Making, Problem Solving, Process Improvement, Requirements Analysis, Attention to Detail, Database Security, Developing Standards, Database Performance Tuning, Operating Systems,Job Description

Principal Accountability
Reporting to the Manager of Data Analytics, the Data Analyst is responsible for working with internal and external clients to design, develop, implement, and manage data ingestion and management workflows. The Data Analyst will always be looking for opportunities to standardize, automate, and deliver more expedient implementation of supply chain services.

Works to understand corporate, external, and host hospital database sources (e.g. Medhost, Evident) and leverage gained understanding to provide deeper data utilization and development of new CHC analytic tools, while providing data flow diagrams and documentation of analysis tools, database structures, stored procedures, and data definitions.

Works in direct contact with CHC corporate and facility end users, as well as with information analysis and data mining system vendors to ensure information stored in analytical systems is available timely, structured as appropriate, understandable, and accurate.

Demonstrates expertise in a variety of generally accepted concepts, practices, and procedures, including cloud SQL and cloud ETL technologies.

Strong written and verbal communications skills are required as this person will interact with both internal and external clients and must be able to translate complex technical concepts into easy to understand terms.

Education
Bachelor's degree or the equivalent education, certifications and related database analysis or management experience.
Responsibilities
Responsible for supporting work environment focused on customer service, service management, and process improvement
Develops and manages data collection and measurement tools and processes
Interacts with internal and external clients to implement manageable data ETL processes
Develops strong understanding of client and corporate database structures, leveraging knowledge to standardize implementation of CHC tools
Supports development of new analytic tools; documenting process, structure, data elements
Plans and manages ETL process updates by maintaining, evaluating, and improving a transaction processing documentation and models
Monitors process performance using established metrics, evaluating and resolving processing and programming problems timely
Secures database by preparing and maintaining access control policies and procedures and implementing backup and disaster recovery procedures
Continually updates job knowledge by participating in educational opportunities, reading professional publications, maintaining personal networks and participating in professional organizations
Provides input to IT and supply chain strategic planning processes
Ability to travel
Skills and Knowledge
Excellent interpersonal, communication, and analytical skills
The ability to interface effectively with internal and external clients
Ability to utilize Google Apps, Google Cloud Platform, and other database and analytical tools
Experience developing and managing data management processes
Experience resolving problems with positive outcomes
Experience prioritizing multiple activities and objectives in a rapidly changing environment, while delivering exceptional client service
Ability to communicate and relate well with others
Communicates openly, respectfully, and timely Shares information appropriately Keeps others well informed Encourages others to share contrary views Responds in a timely manner to messages/requests Expresses self well in writing
Ability to clearly communicate technical terms and applications to non-technical clients
Ability to listen and document the concerns, wants, and needs of clients
Possess a strong customer and service to others orientation
Requires independent analysis, communication and problem solving skills
Experience
3+ years of Database Management experience
3+ years leveraging SQL, ETL processes, and related technologies to develop analytical solutions
Experience with Google technologies including Cloud Dataflow, Dataproc, Pub/Sub, and Data Fusion a plus
Experience with business process management tools a plus
Data Maintenance, Decision Making, Problem Solving, Process Improvement, Requirements Analysis, Attention to Detail, Database Security, Developing Standards, Database Performance Tuning, Operating Systems,--- This is a 3-6 month full-time internship opening ---

Do you love data?

Are you passionate about driving business insights using visualizations?

Do you excel at designing and implementing complex data pipelines and automations necessary to keep a high tech startup thriving?

We are looking for a driven, independent, data analyst intern to join the data science team and work on the following tasks:
Tableau dashboard design and maintenance
Data pipeline implementation and maintenance
Dataset creation, curation, and organization
Day to day user and customer analytics
Applicants must have:
Proficiency in Tableau and Python is a MUST
A degree in computer science or related field
1 year minimum track record in applying analytics and data engineering to real world problems,Zipongo sits at the forefront of how we eat, made exponentially more important during the ongoing pandemic -- we all need help with eating well, getting groceries or restaurant meals delivered, cooking with family, or supporting elderly family members' eating. Zipongo serves the broader community closely partnered with leading health plans and Fortune 100 companies, and we take a data-based approach and strategy to everything we do. We are constantly evolving our strategy, platform, and how we support our clients with data, and we are looking for a Strategic Data Lead that can help us scale our efforts.
capacity to use technical tools/language and systems to systematically clean data
capacity to create clean ontologies of data and update as needed
capacity to create self-sustaining/updating data feeds
capacity to ask intelligent questions of the data and identify data opportunities
capacity to understand business/customer needs and evolve data ontology and data processes (with help of devs) to reinforce needs
capacity to create dynamic reports via lookr or other tools that serve baseline and higher level info/insights purposes,The Biomedical Data Analyst I will be directly responsible for ensuring the accurate, complete, and timely collection, delivery and tracking of data from Research, Commercial and Manufacturing laboratories for analysis, reporting, and presentation.
This is a temporary position through approximately the end of the year. Remote work is possible. This individual does not have to reside in Redwood City, CA.

Write and debug SAS programs of medium to high complexity.
Write and optimize SQL queries against MSSQL database.
Write and debug Python program of medium to high complexity.
Perform accurate, complete, and timely collection, validation, and tracking of research, commercial, and manufacturing data.
Construct datasets and visualizations for reporting.
Maintain accurate documentation of programs and procedures.
Develop programs for collection, extraction, analysis, presentation, or tracking of data.
Other responsibilities as assigned.
Strong communicator with ability to maintain open communication with internal employees, managers, and customers as needed.
Able to integrate and apply feedback in a professional manner.
Able to prioritize and drive to results with a high emphasis on quality.
Ability to work as part of a team.
Uphold company mission and values through accountability, innovation, integrity, quality, and teamwork.
Support and comply with the company’s Quality Management System policies and procedures.
Regular and reliable attendance.
Ability to work on a mobile device, tablet, or in front of a computer screen and/or perform typing for approximately 90% of a typical working day.
Considerable periods of time may be spent concentrating and or analyzing data.
Considerable periods of time may be spent communicating verbally and in various written forms; including presentation material and email with other people.

Minimum Qualifications
Bachelor’s degree in life sciences, computer science, scientific or other relevant discipline.
2+ years of related experience.
2+ years of recent experience with statistical programming with SAS.
2+ years of recent experience writing Python.
1+ years of experience with MSSQL databases and SQL.
Proficient in Microsoft Office to include Excel and Word.
Demonstrated ability to perform the Essential Duties of the position with or without accommodation.
Authorization to work in the United States without sponsorship.
Preferred Qualifications
3+ years of recent experience with statistical programming with SAS.
3+ years of recent experience writing Python.
Familiarity with web development.
Experience with cloud computing (AWS, Azure).
Familiarity with molecular biology.
Experience working with LIMS.
#LI-MF1

We are an equal employment opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, national origin, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, and any other status protected by applicable local, state or federal law. Applicable portions of the Company’s affirmative action program are available to any applicant or employee for inspection upon request.,Software Test Engineer - Data Analyst
Verb Surgical - a Google and Johnson & Johnson joint venture!

The mission of this role is to develop tools for analysis and testing R&D algorithms and prototypes, and identify the improvements to a surgical system. We are looking for a strong engineer who is passionate about surgery and robotics and preferably experienced in clinical procedures, surgeon needs and clinical environment. This position will support developing tools for data acquisition and performing post processing of data including system performance characterization and accuracy assessment across various technical projects at Applied Research Team at Verb.

Professional Experience/Background to be successful in this role:
Bachelors Degree in Computer Science, Data Science/Engineering or equivalent experience
3-4 years hands-on experience in software product development. Prior research work is an added benefit
Demonstrated programming skill in C++
Learn, develop, and modify Python and Matlab scripts for data collection and analysis
Familiar with Pythons Scikit-learn library
Experience with software configuration management systems, such as Subversion and Git
Working with Linux and Windows
Key Accountabilities:
Own development of test processes from component-level to overall system
Design, and implement interfaces for data exchange with other systems
Knowledge of clinical environment and procedures
Knowledge of robotics and common sensors (encoders, load cells, optical trackers, etc.)
Strong Math skills
Strong level of ownership, accountability, and drive for exceeding expectations
Bias towards action, great sense of accuracy, and perform well under pressure
Designing clinically relevant cases/scenarios/ usage cases to characterize/improve system components, and executing these cases in both full and sub-system level
Design of experiments for the optimal test strategy, time and effort
Developing modular test scripts in Matlab and/or Python to automate test data collection from various sensors
Familiar with querying data from cloud-hosted services
Analysis of test data to create understanding of system performance and user behavior, and to extract key performance metrics and insights for design improvements.
Debug new hardware and software issues that pop up in the lab and in the field.
Preparation and documentation of test protocols and results
Effective communication of results across multiple teams at Verb in a well-organized manner.
Teamwork attitude, and ability to multitask and prioritize
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Fast learner in high tempo environment
Expected Outcomes:
Clinically relevant test protocols that evaluate the sub-systems of the Verb platform as well as the entire system performance.
Perform post processing of data to capture information from raw data and perform comparison against clinical requirements.
Growing dataset driving the development of algorithms on user behavior, and prediction of user intent for improved safety.
Who is Verb Surgical?

Verb Surgical is shaping the future of surgery. A new future, a future unimagined even a few years ago, which will involve machine learning, robotic surgery, instrumentation, advanced visualization, and data analytics. A future of surgery that aims to achieve improved patient outcomes, lower costs, and greater hospital efficiency.

Verb Surgical was founded with technology, expertise, and funding from Verily (formerly Google Life Sciences) and Ethicon, a medical device company in the Johnson & Johnson family of companies. This company will continue in strong partnership with Verily and Johnson & Johnson (Google and Johnson & Johnson Team for Robotic Surgery) to advance the surgical tools and capabilities available to surgeons and OR professionals today.,ABOUT US

Lark is the world's largest A.I. healthcare provider, servicing more than a million patients suffering from, or at risk of, chronic disease with A.I. Nurses. We're on a mission to improve people's health and happiness through our digital health coach. We are the only A.I. nurse ever to become fully medically reimbursed to 100% replace a live nurse because we achieved equivalent health outcomes to live healthcare professionals - which allows for infinitely scalable healthcare. Since launch, Lark has continued to receive awards and accolades for both our product, and our leadership, including:
Apple's Top 10 Apps in the World
Business Insider's most innovative companies in the world along with Uber and Snapchat
A CEO who was recognized as the #1 in Top 10 Women in Tech to Watch by Inc.
CDC recognition of our Diabetes Prevention Program.

Lark is open to someone working remote for this role in the United States.

We are looking for an experienced Senior Data Analyst to join our growing team in Mountain View, CA. You will work cross-functionally with the data, product and business teams to analyze user behavior cohorts, and give recommendations on the best action to take for improving outcomes for our users, and for the business. The person who will succeed in this role is someone who has worked in a fast-paced startup environment analyzing complex product datasets

ABOUT THE ROLE

What You'll Do:

Duties & Responsibilities
Analyze the impact of recently deployed features to determine their impact on user engagement
Design and analyze A/B tests, including hypothesis testing and causal inference
Build reports for clients and dashboards for internal usages
Analyze the performance of various cohorts and develop insights about user behavior that can be used to market the product
What You'll Need:
Knowledge & Skills
Confidence using a variety of techniques to analyze large streams of data to come to conclusions
Must be an expert in SQL and Python
Analytics experience around consumer applications, with a focus on user engagement and retention being a plus

Credentials & Experience
BS/MS in quantitative or STEM-related field, PhD preferred
5+ years of prior experience analyzing complex product datasets a MUST
Must have data analytics experience across multiple platforms including Python, Jupiter, AWS, Snowflake, NoSQL, Spark
Strong communication skills and a highly collaborative work-style
Prior experience around SAAS and consumer applications, with a focus on user engagement and retention being a plus
JOIN US

Our team works with cutting edge tools and technology related to Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. We are using NLP to process millions of meals, and accelerometer data to compute activity and sleep amounts from users' phones. Our chat A.I. is the most sophisticated digital health engagement tool in the world. Join us and make it even better!

Lark is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Lark does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, non-disqualifying physical or mental disability, national origin, veteran status or any other basis covered by appropriate law. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit, and business need.,Job #: 56721
Job Type: Full Time
Job Title: Master Data Management Analyst
Date Posted: 7/1/2020
Deadline Date: 5/31/2020
Recruiter: Hickethier, Michelle
Department Name: Supply Chain System Analytics
Division:
Bargaining Unit: NONE
Hospital Location: Palo Alto
Schedule: Standard
Work Schedule:
FTE: 1.0
BiWeeklyHours: 80
SchedOption: 8
Shift: Days
Posting Category: Professional
New/Replace: REPL
Zip Code: 94305
500P:

Job Description:

The Master Data Management Analyst supports Supply Chain Logistics & Sourcing through a comprehensive understanding of Master Data Management, Logistics and Sourcing operational and business needs. This position requires a thorough understanding of MDM concepts, industry data standards and supply chain operations. The Master Data Management Analyst collaborates with ITS, Operational Managers and external vendors to ensure consistent data management and accurate information flow to support core enterprise functions, including Supply Chain Automation, inventory management, vendor and recall management, and Non-Labor Spend Savings initiatives. This individual will work under the direction of the Data Manager within Supply Chain - Sourcing.

Essential Functions
The essential functions listed are typical examples of work performed by positions in this job classification. They are not designed to contain or be interpreted as a comprehensive inventory of all duties, tasks, and responsibilities. Employees may also perform other duties as assigned.

Employees must abide by all Joint Commission Requirements including but not limited to sensitivity to cultural diversity, patient care, patient's rights and ethical treatment, safety and security of physical environments, emergency management, teamwork, respect for others, participation in ongoing education and training, communication and adherence to safety and quality programs, sustaining compliance with National Patient Safety Goals, and licensure and health screenings.

Employee must perform all duties and responsibilities in accordance with the C-I-CARE Standards of the Hospital. C-I-CARE is the foundation of Stanford's patient-experience and represents a framework for patient-centered interactions.

Under the direction of the Master Data Manager, day-to-day activities and priorities are based on collaboration with the Supply Chain leaders. These include:

· Function as the primary point of contact related to the day-to-day execution of MDM related tasks. They will work to answer questions, resolve data issues and provide analysis.
· Develop the plan with breakdown of tasks, resources, efforts and deliverables needed to successfully execute and complete the project
· Oversee and manage the assigned project from start to finish and support other assigned analysts in ensuring completion of deliverables while maintaining integrity and quality
· Coordinate across teams to ensure ownership of assigned tasks across other functional teams
· Proactively identify and develop KPI's for Supply Chain leadership under guidance of SC Systems and Analytics leaders
· Develop models, ad-hoc reports, sharing observations with leadership and identifying areas for improvement
· Develop and maintain requirements and definitions for new/enhances analytical reports and dashboards
· Review and analyze source data and ensure data accuracy and integrity. Guide and advice data analyst's I to implement process and system improvements to enhance integrity and accuracy of master data
· Work with stakeholders to understand their available data, optimize associated data model and create business insights
· Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality of master data
· Develop and automate maintenance of master data increasing efficiencies and optimizing collection of data
· Develop design to extract, transform source data into the ODS/data mart and create, refine and automate data pipelines
· Assists in developing and maintaining requirements/specifications for new or enhanced functionality to department operational reports.
· Collaborates with stakeholders and works effectively with Technology Operations/Infrastructure teams, Category Management and other SC Operations teams to ensure continued operations, integrity and maintenance of the data platform
· Supports and performs master data additions, changes and deletions in accordance with procedures and business rules as needed for day-to-day operations
· Ensure requests for master data maintenance are properly authorized and approved by working with appropriate Data Managers and Data Owners.
· Educate users on master data processes and business rules.
· Evaluates business and program application systems' functionality to identify gaps, measuring the solution impact to business operations. The MDMA serves as a liaison between the business managers and ITS to improve productivity and developing and delivering improved data quality and analytics.
· Maintains system applications for key stakeholders under general direction of the Data Manager and with guidance from Lawson team.
· Filter and cleanse data, review reports and performance indicators to location and correct data and processes where needed.
· Runs ad hoc and scheduled reports and collects feedback from customers on creating new reports.
· Serve as the SME on master data
· Performs proactive and ad hoc price performance benchmarking.
· Collaborate with Category Management to define tasks and deliverables to supports Non-Labor Saving (expense reduction) initiatives by providing Item/Vendor/Contract and Par Management expertise
· Under direction of the Purchasing manager, designs and maintains organized system for Pricing Agreements and ensures the accuracy of prices in item file and on POs. Partners with Accounts Payable to ensure accuracy of vendor file.
· Conducts quality control activities and recommends and/or implements additions/changes to Master Data Management policies and procedures.
· Monitors key performance indicators to ensure data accuracy and data management policies are working as expected.
· Develop and design improvements to the processes, procedures, tools, rules and metrics to ensure data integrity of master data domains.
Performs other related and incidental duties as needed or assigned.
Equal Opportunity Employer Stanford Health Care (SHC) strongly values diversity and is committed to equal opportunity and non-discrimination in all of its policies and practices, including the area of employment. Accordingly, SHC does not discriminate against any person on the basis of race, color, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity and/or expression, religion, age, national or ethnic origin, political beliefs, marital status, medical condition, genetic information, veteran status, or disability, or the perception of any of the above. People of all genders, members of all racial and ethnic groups, people with disabilities, and veterans are encouraged to apply. Qualified applicants with criminal convictions will be considered after an individualized assessment of the conviction and the job requirements.

Job Qualifications:

Minimum Requirements
Education: Bachelor's Degree in Information Systems, Business Administration or other related field from an accredited college or university is required
Experience:
Four (4) years of progressively responsible and directly related work experience, preferably in a hospital environment.
Positions supporting SHC require demonstrated proficiency in the use of Infor Lawson Supply Chain Management.
Demonstrated ability to cleanse, analyze and connect data from multiple sources.
Understanding of Master Data Management principles and practices in an enterprise environment.
Demonstrated experience with Infor Lawson Supply Chain Management.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities
These are the observable and measurable attributes and skills required to perform successfully the essential functions of the job and are generally demonstrated through qualifying experience, education, or licensure/certification.

Ability to be sensitive to the needs of customers through the practice of quality service principles
Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing, to persuade internal and external stakeholders
Ability to develop long-range business plans and strategies
Ability to manage complex relationships with critical vendor partners
Ability to strategize, plan and implement change
Ability to understand, draft and negotiate Contractual Agreements and Pricing Agreements
Ability to work effectively both as a team player and leader
Knowledge and understanding of financial and statistical activity reports
Knowledge of automated materials management functions
Knowledge of basic legal principles
Knowledge of project management processes and systems,Under general supervision, this position exists to assist the organization in making strategic data-related decisions by analyzing, manipulating, tracking, internally managing, and reporting data. This position functions both as a senior analyst and as a high-level statistical analytics programmer.

Essential Functions:
- Designs and enhances databases.
- Designs effective and user-friendly menu systems.
- Develops accurate, easy to read, and useful information reports.
- Designs and generates tracking and monitoring tools.
- Participates in the development of outcomes and process measures, including technical specifications to enable population measurement, guideline implementation, and evaluation.
- Tests complex statistical routines using macros, vendor software, and software written by self and others.
- Tests and maintains data integrity.
- May assist with sophisticated statistical models and forecasting tools using these databases.
- Assists with the definition of complex multi-dimensional healthcare issues and develops time tables/processes for decision making.
- May translate needs, issues, and ideas into effective strategies and action plans.
- May formulate specific implementation plans and evaluates the effectiveness of actions/programs implemented.
- Develops creative alternative solutions.
- May assist in the determination of goals and priorities with team, clients, or project management sponsors.
- May communicate results/recommendations to project sponsors, clients, and various senior level audiences (including physicians for TPMG departments).

Basic Qualifications:
Experience
- Three (3) years of programming in SAS, SQL, VBA, net, or equivalent statistical analytical programming language.
- Minimum two (2) or more years of related analytical consulting experience.
Education
- Bachelor's degree in economics, finance, health care administration, public health administration, statistics, mathematics, operations
research, or related field required OR four (4) years of experience in a directly related field.
- High School Diploma or General Education Development (GED) required.
Licenses, Certifications, Registrations
- N/A.


Additional Requirements:
- Experience mainframe operating systems.
- Microsoft Office skills required.
- Strong analytic and critical thinking skills, writing skills, communication skills, consulting skills, and ability to work within a team.
- Ability to express complex analytical and technical information to senior management or to audiences with clinical training.
- Must be an independent self-starter.
- Must be able to work in a Labor/Management Partnership environment.


Preferred Qualifications:
- Analytical consulting experience in the healthcare field preferred.
- Experience with MVS/TSO operating systems preferred.
- Experience with analytical manipulation and interpretation of large databases preferred.
- Project management experience preferred.
- Master's degree preferred.
- Broad familiarity with medical practices, especially population management and process and outcomes measurement preferred.
- Knowledge of JCL strongly preferred.

Kaiser Permanente is an equal opportunity employer committed to a diverse and inclusive workforce. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), age, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, parental status, ancestry, disability, gender identity, veteran status, genetic information, other distinguishing characteristics of diversity and inclusion, or any other protected status.

External hires must pass a background check/drug screen. Qualified applicants with arrest and/or conviction records will be considered for employment in a manner consistent with federal and state laws, as well as applicable local ordinances, including but not limited to the San Francisco and Los Angeles Fair Chance Ordinances.,The Data Analyst serves as a resource for business intelligence, performance and operational analysis for Central Health. Under general direction of the Analytics and Reporting Manager, the Data Analyst is responsible for organizing, analyzing and reporting on data from large clinical, financial and enrollment data sets. The Data Analyst will also assist in the design and development of data warehouses, performance dashboards and other systems that support the needs of an integrated network of physicians, safety net providers and hospitals to advance care that is patient centered and data driven.

Collect and document business requirements for reporting and analysis initiatives with customers.
Perform quantitative and/or qualitative data analysis and prepare results to share with internal and external customers.
Aid in design and development of data warehouse/data mart applications.
Interact with IT Team and Business Units to interpret dashboard requirement specifications and assist in the development and implementation of dashboards for the CCC.
Undertake complex data integration activities.
Utilize SQL or other advanced analytic tools to perform data extract and query functions.
Identify and troubleshoot data anomalies and irregularities.
Prepare written and oral reports that communicate necessary information to internal and external customers.
Produce and streamline as needed ongoing monthly, quarterly and annual reports in support of CCC.
Willingness to learn and work with Business Intelligence (BI) tools for extracting and compiling data.
Become a data subject matter expert (SME) and understand various sources and applications of CCC data.
Performs other duties as assigned.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES
Use of statistics to solve problems and perform moderately complex data analysis.
Experience understanding and writing SQL queries in various environments.
Experience developing and troubleshooting programming code (e.g. SQL, SAS, STATA, R).
Demonstrated ability to manage and prioritize multiple projects with varying deadlines.
Compliance with data confidentiality and security procedures.
Perform complex operations in Microsoft Office Suite, with an emphasis on Excel and Access.
Ability to write and speak clearly, easily communicating complex ideas as indicated by audience.
Knowledge of healthcare, including medical claims coding, relationships between health plans, providers, and payers, a plus.

MINIMUM EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE
Bachelor’s degree in related field required, Master’s degree preferred.
1-3 years of experience with data management and statistical analysis.
Proficiency in using SQL for database queries.
Experience in a health or healthcare field.
Experience using statistical analysis software such as SAS, R, or STATA is desirable but not required.
Any equivalent combination of education and/or experience may substitute.,Do you love identifying patterns and anomolies, and digging into the data to understand what shapes the story behind those metrics? Do you enjoy uncovering differences by industry, business model or region? Do you find market shifts superbly interesting, and always look for the case study on how those shifts impact businesses across the broader spectrum? Then you will love this Business Analyst job opening at TalentCare!

In this work-from-home position, you will enjoy the autonomy of managing your day-to-day work priorities while interacting with an inquisitive and unconventional team of problem solvers. You will have a report designer to support your efforts, and work directly with senior and executive leadership on a regular basis. Plus, leverage a proprietary database with over half a million profiles, millions of activity metrics, and a robust business intelligence tool to support your analyses.

While we are all remote (and always have been), we are a close-knit and collaborative team. We love to experiment and challenge ourselves to see things from new perspectives, with the ultimate goal of making talent acquisition easy. Your Business Intelligence insights will drive operational service delivery, product selection and even product development. Apply today!Business Analyst job responsibilities include:
Uncover the story behind the data and help internal stakeholders understand why and how it matters for their clients, teams, or processes
Define business requirements by gathering input from relevant stakeholders and translate into data specifications
Communicate insights and recommendations to client management team
Coordinate with report designer to ensure data accurately answers key business questions
Leverage existing or assist in the development of new reports
Identify when client data varies significantly from industry benchmarks and alert appropriate teams
Business Analyst qualifications:
Bachelor’s or master’s degree in Mathematics, Data Science, MIS or similar
4+ years experience in a Business Analyst, Data Analyst, Business Intelligence Analyst or similar role
Proven ability to lead the development or refinement of dashboards, visualizations and reports to elegantly and simply answer complex business questions
Personable, down-to-earth, and the ability integrate well into a team of witty colleagues,Job ID 1186846

Category Data Analytics
Schedule Full-time
Description:

Position Purpose:
Analyze health management programs including: data collection, validation and outcome measurement. May include:
o Financial, pharmacy, claims, provider, and member data
o IRS, CMS, HHSC, HEDIS reporting
o Internal data cleansing and data reconciliation analysis
o Trend analysis in various functional areas of health care management.
Create and generate reports through MS-Excel, MS-Access, and SQL using Business Objects interface and direct links to core databases (ODS/EDW)
Produce reports for and interface with senior management and internal and external stakeholders.
Gather and interpret business requirements and monitor data trends to proactively identify issues
Execute data changes and update core systems as needed
Handle multiple projects and timelines effectively and communicate risks and issues to manager regularly
Assist with training lower level Data Analysts.

Qualifications:

Responsible for analytical data needs. Handle complex data requests, reports, and predictive data modeling.

Knowledge/Experience:
Bachelor’s degree related field or equivalent experience. 2+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience or 1+ years of related IT experience, including data warehouse, coding or ETL experience. Advanced knowledge of Microstrategy, SQL, and Microsoft Applications, including Excel and Access.

Centene is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to diversity, and values the ways in which we are different. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other characteristic protected by applicable law.,Job Functions, Duties, Responsibilities and Position Qualifications:

Position Summary:

The Managed Care Data Analyst position is responsible for supporting the development of sophisticated financial data models to inform decision making for all managed care contracting activity. This position supports all other analytics needs for the Managed Care department and provides analytical support utilizing Managed Care and other data to other areas of the company. This position reports directly to the Vice President of Managed Care.

Job Responsibilities:

Essential Functions:
Supports the Manager to design and automate data tools to inform all managed care decision making including but not limited to:
Contract analysis models
Out of Network financial evaluation tools including examination of high and low paying patients and paid claims compared to booked revenue
Expansive data tools examining large national health plan payors and other targeted health plan payors; includes impact of contracting, the impact of missed opportunities and financial impact our divisions
Provides analytical support to the VP of Managed Care
Supports the Vice President of Managed Care / Public Policy for health plan insurance enrollment initiatives
Supports market pull-through and other post contracting activities
Provides support to other areas of the company where Managed Care financial data expertise is required, including
Finance
Central Billing Office
Business Development
Operations / Presidents and CEO
Skills:
Strong analytical skills.
Excellent organizational skills.
Other Functions:
Perform other duties as assigned.
Job Qualifications:

Required:
Bachelor’s degree preferred; degree in Finance, Decision Sciences, Business or another Analytical disciplines strongly preferred
Two plus (2+) years of experience with a health plan or provider data modeling and decision support strongly preferred; other relevant experience will be considered; previous dialysis experience a strong plus
Proficient with all Microsoft Office products, including Outlook and Word
Advanced analytical skills required; Excel (VBA experience preferred), Access, SQL preferred; Microsoft Dynamics, Cognos and Tableau experience a plus
Knowledge of Mysis
Certified Professional Coder - CPC Preferred
Preferred
N/A
Travel
N/A
License Certification:
N/A
Scheduled Weekly Hours:

40

Work Shift:

Company:

Sonic Healthcare USA, Inc

Sonic Healthcare USA provides equal employment opportunities to all employees and applicants for employment and prohibits discrimination and harassment of any type without regard to race, color, religion, age, sex, national origin, disability status, genetics, protected veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or any other characteristic protected by federal, state or local laws.

This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training.,We Are Hiring

Technology Specialist- Data Delivery and Governance - Full-Time,Day - 7715 Chevy Chase Bldg - Austin, TX

Remote position***

Why Join Ascension?

Ascension Technologiesleverages technology to create collaborative solutions that improve everyday health decisions. The technology enables seamless access to data across all applications transforming the customer experience when interacting with technology and enhancing our ability across Ascension to better serve communities with greater agility and responsiveness. It is used to provide insightful use of automation and data-drive improvements to enhance the provider, patient and consumer experience as well as keeping cybersecruity with a strong posture to protect data and other valuable assets.

Ascension is a faith-based healthcare organization dedicated to transformation through innovation across the continuum of care. As one of the leading non-profit and Catholic health systems in the U.S., Ascension is committed to delivering compassionate, personalized care to all, especially to those most in need. In FY2018, Ascension provided nearly $2 billion in care of persons living in poverty and other community benefit programs.

Ascension Information Services is one of the nation's largest healthcare information technology services organizations. We provide Ascension and its subsidiaries low-cost, high-value IT infrastructure and software application services that:
Support rapid and effective clinical decision making
Improve efficiency and care transitions
Foster information sharing across the continuum of care
Make knowledge and data actionable, leading to improved patient outcomes
What You Will Do

Responsibilities:
Responsible for analyzing the datasets to contribute towards design.
The Technical Analyst must have considerable expertise in SQL, Extract Transform Load (ETL), and stored procedure creation for data transformation.
Must have demonstrated success translating business and functional requirements to technical specifications.
Technical Data Analyst will work closely with the rest of the scrum team and internal business partners to identify, evaluate, design, and implement data solutions.
The Technical Data Analyst will work iteratively on the cloud platform to contribute to the design of scalable, high performance solutions that offer measurable business value to customers.
Develops partnerships with senior users to understand their business needs and define future application requirements. Evaluates the applicability of leading edge technologies and uses this information to significantly influence future business strategies.
Analyzes complex business and competitive issues and discerns the implications for systems support.
Designs, directs and performs analyses to resolve complex first-time project issues, including analysis of the technical and economic feasibility of proposed system solutions.
Designs projects with broad implication for the business and/or the future architecture, successfully addressing cross-technology and cross-platform issues. Balances and negotiates the needs of multiple users and communicates the business advantages of various technical solutions.
Manages customer expectations and ensures prompt and complete customer service. Customizes presentations to the interests of the audience.
Develops expert understanding of applications development processes, and in-depth knowledge of leading edge technologies to create plans for future technology use.
Bachelor's Level degree preferred
Technology certifications preferred
Responsibilities:
Responsible for analyzing the datasets to contribute towards design.
The Technical Analystmust have considerable expertise in SQL, Extract Transform Load (ETL), and stored procedure creation for data transformation. Must have demonstrated success translating business and functional requirements to technical specifications
Technical Data Analyst will work closely with the rest of the scrum team and internal business partners to identify, evaluate, design, and implement data solutions
The Technical Data Analyst will work iteratively on the cloud platform to contribute to the design of scalable, high performance solutions that offer measurable business value to customers.
Develops partnerships with senior users to understand their business needs and define future application requirements
Evaluates the applicability of leading edge technologies and uses this information to significantly influence future business strategies.
Analyzes complex business and competitive issues and discerns the implications for systems support
Designs, directs and performs analyses to resolve complex first-time project issues, including analysis of the technical and economic feasibility of proposed system solutions
Designs projects with broad implication for the business and/or the future architecture, successfully addressing cross-technology and cross-platform issues. Balances and negotiates the needs of multiple users and communicates the business advantages of various technical solutions
Manages customer expectations and ensures prompt and complete customer service
Customizes presentations to the interests of the audience.
Develops expert understanding of applications development processes, and in-depth knowledge of leading edge technologies to create plans for future technology use
Required Work Experience:
Minimum number years of relevant experience:3 Years
Strong Analytical Skills
Coding skills in SQL
Experience with RDBMS systems and/or large scale data
Demonstrated success translating business requirements to technical specifications
Abilities to capture and consolidate functional requirements into technical requirements documents and communicate documents to the team
Work assignments involve moderately complex to complex issues where the analysis of situations or data requires an in-depth evaluation of variable factors
With limited guidance, responsible for working on moderately complex assignments/projects
Regularly exercises independent judgment on matters of significance including making recommendations on management
Begins to influence department's strategy
Makes decisions on moderately complex to complex issues regarding technical approach for project components and completion of own tasks/responsibilities of substantial complexity
Often operates in ambiguous situations
Identifies areas for possible improvements and proactively addresses problems within scope of responsibility
Regularly makes recommendations on new processes, tools and services that can impact multiple projects and other functions
Work is performed without direction. Exercises considerable latitude in determining objectives and approaches to assignments
Normally receives little instruction on day-to-day work, general instructions on new assignments. Often determines methods/approach to work/projects and establishes own work priorities and timelines
Work is evaluated upon completion to ensure that results and objectives have been met
Desired Work Experience:
Understands or has experience with Extract Transform Load (ETL), and stored procedure creation for data transformation
Experience with GCP platform development tools big query, data prep, and cloud storage desired
Understands database schemas, data flow diagrams, and data specifications
Understands source systems and the common business and technical keys
Abilities to capture, consolidate, and communicate information from Product Owner and Functional SME's into business and technical requirements documents, communicate documents to the development team
Reviews and evaluates developed data output to ensure it conforms to business and technical requirements.
Translates technical issues for product owners and business stakeholders
Resolve differences between conflicting business requirements by championing the communications and vetting needs warranted for overall needs
Serve as a liaison between development, product owner, scrum master and business owner to ensure technical compatibility and satisfaction of solutions
Healthcare (clinical, ambulatory, etc.) Data Subject Matter Expertise
Analyze the existing dataset to contribute towards design
Data correlation analysis
Stored procedure creation for data transformation
Coordinating operational tasks in setting up schedule file moves from source to destinations including builds of Logging, Monitoring and Alerts configurations
Assists with Quality Control and Assurance on Data Projects
Creation of views from source to destination projects
Create and Maintain Data Models (Logical and Physical)
Perform reverse engineering of physical data models and SQL Scripts to create technical specs
Develop best practices for standard naming conventions ensure consistency of data models and data storage locations
Master level technology degree preferred
Bachelor's Level degree preferred
Technology certifications preferred
What You Will Need

Education:
High school diploma/GED with 2 years of experience, or Associate's degree, or Bachelor's degree required.
Work Experience:
3 years of experience preferred.
Equal Employment Opportunity

Ascension Technologiesis an EEO/AA Employer M/F/Disability/Vet. Please click the link below for more information.

http://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/pdf/eeopost.pdf

EEO is the Law Poster Supplement

http://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/pdf/ofccp_eeo_supplement_final_jrf_qa_508c.pdf

E-Verify Statement

Ascension Technologies participates in the Electronic Employment Verification Program. Please click the E-Verify link below for more information.

E -Verify (link to E-verify site),Under the guidance of the Director of Analytics and Reporting, the Senior Strategy Data Analyst will work on strategic planning, demographic, operational, performance measurement, research, evaluation, and other reporting to improve the health of our community by caring for those who need it most. This position works with Central Health Enterprise partners to coordinate responses to data requests. These requests may include, but are not limited to regulatory reporting requirements, research and data analysis to support partner alignment, business development, program development, and program evaluation and performance measurement. Work will include, but will not be limited to, preparing data for analysis, automating data staging as appropriate; creating data visualizations and maps; analyzing data outputs to compose written reports that respond to data requests; creating program evaluation plans and writing program evaluation reports; and presenting data analysis and findings to leadership and external stakeholders.

Essential Duties (at least 5 that are non-negotiable duties and are absolutely pertinent to successfully completing the job without accommodations):
• Prepares data from multiple and various large datasets for analysis, automating data prep when possible
• Creates data visualizations using available applications (e.g. Tableau, MS Excel, ArcGIS)
• Analyzes trends, determines accuracy and relevancy of data information and present solutions and alternatives to issues when needed
• Applies inductive reasoning to combine separate pieces of information, or specific answers to problems
• Leverages literature (e.g. journal articles, white papers, etc.) and other publicly available data resources related to data requests to inform analysis when appropriate
• Prepares accurate and meaningful reports that describe and interpret findings of analyses for upper management decision making
• Presents data analysis and findings to leadership and external stakeholders
• Creates population density and other data driven maps using ArcGIS that may stand alone or be included in analyses
• Creates program evaluation plans and conducts program evaluations with a final deliverable that includes a written report of evaluation findings and presentation of said findings to stakeholders
• Protects the confidentiality of patient records, information, and activities that involve patient health information
• Supports other quantitative and qualitative data-related activities as needed
• Performs other duties as assigned
Knowledge/Skills/Abilities:
• Strong attention to detail and accuracy
• Strong problem solving and critical thinking skills with effective follow through, analyzing information and evaluating results to choose the best solution to answer questions and solve problems
• Interest in learning mapping software or working with data within the health care sector if not already proficient in this area
• Ability to program in SQL preferably in an SMSS and/or PostgreSQL environment
• Ability to perform advanced functions in MS Excel version 2016 and later; functions include but are not limited to vLookup, statistical functions, macro creation, pivot tables and chart creation, etc.
• Aptitude to work with visual applications such as Tableau and ArcGIS
• Aptitude to work with statistical software or programming languages such as SAS, R, and/ or Python
• Ability to:
o Handle detail and constantly change between competing priorities
o Conduct research into software solutions and products as required
o Follow data confidentiality and security procedures
o Produce quality work under tight deadlines with strong attention to detail and accuracy
o Manage and prioritize multiple projects with varying deadlines
o Efficiently shift back and forth between two or more activities or sources of information
o Accurately connect data from various sources
o Function and make progress in an ambiguous atmosphere

MINIMUM EDUCATION:
• Bachelor’s Degree
PREFERRED EDUCATION:
• Master’s Degree in mathematics, statistics, computer engineering epidemiology or data analytics field preferred
MINIMUM EXPERIENCE:
• Three (3) years’ data experience
PREFERRED EXPERIENCE:
• Two (2) years health care industry experience,We Are Hiring

Clinical Data Management - Technical Analyst

Virtual Position

Why Join Ascension?

Ascensionleverages technology to create collaborative solutions that improve everyday health decisions. The technology enables seamless access to data across all applications transforming the customer experience when interacting with technology and enhancing our ability across Ascension to better serve communities with greater agility and responsiveness. It is used to provide insightful use of automation and data-drive improvements to enhance the provider, patient and consumer experience as well as keeping cybersecruity with a strong posture to protect data and other valuable assets.

Ascension is a faith-based healthcare organization dedicated to transformation through innovation across the continuum of care. As one of the leading non-profit and Catholic health systems in the U.S., Ascension is committed to delivering compassionate, personalized care to all, especially to those most in need. In FY2018, Ascension provided nearly $2 billion in care of persons living in poverty and other community benefit programs.

What You Will Do

As an Associate with Ascension you will work with assigned customers to define business requirements and translate them through system design and solution development.

Responsibilities:
Designs, directs and performs data analyses to resolve complex business issues including technical and economic feasibility of proposed system solutions.
Uses data analysis and technical skills to help architect comprehensive models that integrate with other systems and data consumers.
Works toward troubleshooting and streamlining data validation efforts in complex database migrations.
Works on projects with broad implications requiring systems integration of multiple technical platforms.
Works closely with other teams of internal and external customers and vendors, understanding critical touchpoints and implications.
Manages expectations and ensures prompt and complete customer service.
Produces project plans, RFP's, and RFI's.
Leads design sessions by presenting logical statements of business problems and designs.
Customizes presentations to the interests of the audience.
What You Will Need:

Desired Work Experience:
3-5years of experience preferred.
3+ Years of SQL required.
Experience in Healthcare Technology/Terminology required.
Previous experience with other languages such as Python preferred.
Previous experience with multiple RDBMS, Oracle,SQL Server preferred.
Previous experience with Google Cloud Platform preferred.
What You Will Need

Education:
High school diploma/GED with 2 years of experience, or Associate's degree, or Bachelor's degree required
Work Experience:
3 years of experience preferred.
Equal Employment Opportunity

Ascension Technologiesis an EEO/AA Employer M/F/Disability/Vet. Please click the link below for more information.

http://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/pdf/eeopost.pdf

EEO is the Law Poster Supplement

http://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/compliance/posters/pdf/ofccp_eeo_supplement_final_jrf_qa_508c.pdf

E-Verify Statement

Ascension Technologies participates in the Electronic Employment Verification Program. Please click the E-Verify link below for more information.

E -Verify (link to E-verify site),Position Purpose: Responsible for analytic data needs of the business unit. Handle complex data projects and acts as a lead for other Data Analysts.
Provide advanced analytical support for business operations in all or some of the following areas: claims, provider data, member data, clinical data, HEDIS, pharmacy, external reporting
Extract, load, model, and reconcile large amounts of data across multiple system platforms and sources
Review data to determine operational impacts and needed actions; elevate issues, trends, areas for improvement and opportunities to management.
Develop reports and deliverables for management
Model data using MS Excel, Access, SQL, and/or other data ware house analytical tools
Ensure compliance with federal and state deliverable reporting requirements by performing data quality audits and analysis.
Assist with training and mentoring other Data Analysts.
Education/Experience:
Bachelor’s degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4 years of statistical analysis or 2 years of related IT experience, including data warehouse, coding or ETL experience. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of Enterprise Reporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation. Encounters experience preferred. Experience
writing and editing complex code in SQL. Demonstrated knowledge of SSIS, SSRS
strongly preferred.

Centene is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to diversity, and values the ways in which we are different. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other characteristic protected by applicable law.,OverviewJOB POSTING: Data Analyst - Quality Improvement ServicesFull Time, Benefits Eligible, Monday - FridayWe are seeking a Data Analyst in Quality Improvement Services The QIS Data Analyst is responsible for reviewing and analyzing data that supports various projects in Quality Improvement Services. The QIS Data Analyst manages and maintains databases and sources of information for quality initiatives, accreditation efforts, regulatory mandates, contractual requirement and ad hoc requests. This position coordinates data from various sources.ResponsibilitiesWhy Nationwide Children's HospitalThe moment you walk through our doors, you can feel it. When you meet one of our patient families, you believe it. And when you talk with anyone who works here, you want to be part of it, too. Welcome to Nationwide Children's Hospital, where Passion Meets Purpose.Here, Everyone Matters. We're 12,000 strong. And it takes every single one of us to improve the lives of the kids we care for, and the kids from around the world we'll never even meet. Kids who are living healthier, fuller lives because of the knowledge we share. We know it takes a Collaborative Culture to deliver on our promise to provide the very best, innovative care and to foster new discoveries, made possible by the most groundbreaking research. Anywhere.Ask anyone with a Nationwide Children's badge what they do for a living. They'll tell you it's More Than a Job. It's a calling. It's a chance to use and grow your talent to make an impact that truly matters. Because here, we exist simply to help children.What Will You Be Doing?* Provides data support by querying from Clarity/EDW for clinical data using Oracle SQL.* Manager/Administrator for QIS maintained data systems (i.e. Equipment Documentation, patient satisfaction, etc.).* Serves as the subject matter expert for QIS maintained data systems & provides data from these systems.* Develops training materials and trains hospital leaders/staff in various applications (i.e. Equipment Documentation system, patient satisfaction portal etc.).* Maintains QIS monthly/quarterly scorecards.* Performs duties related to constant readiness program.* Analyzes data using appropriate statistical process control charts.* Establishes and maintains timelines for projects and coordinates activities with other requesters to obtain specific information to meet project expectations.* Maintains knowledge level and ability related to continuous quality improvement through publications, conferences, networking with other hospitals and through the website.QualificationsWhat Are We Looking For?To fulfill this role successfully, you must possess these minimum qualifications and experience:* Bachelor's degree in statistics, health informatics, or related field; Masters preferred, MBA, MHA or similar* 2-4 years of experience in health care data analysis; high level working knowledge of Microsoft Office and components, including Access;* Experience with relational databases, SQL, Crystal Reports required* Statistical software SPSS and other tools preferred.* Excellent interpersonal and organizational skills necessary to present and communicate important information effectively to all levels of hospital staff.Your Benefits, Your Wellness:As an employer, Nationwide Children's recognizes the importance of the benefits we offer. We also recognize the importance of balancing your work and personal needs. Our benefits and Employee Wellness package is designed to:* Empower you to be a conscientious health care consumer through educational and wellness activities* Establish a work environment that promotes health and well-being* Support your financial protection and security in retirementMost of our positions are benefits' eligible from day 1.MINIMUM PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS* Talking in person/on the phone Frequently (34-66%)* Standing/Walking Frequently (34-66%)* Typing on a keyboard Frequently (34-66%)EOE/M/F/Disability/VetOptions,Abbott is a global healthcare leader that helps people live more fully at all stages of life. Our portfolio of life-changing technologies spans the spectrum of healthcare, with leading businesses and products in diagnostics, medical devices, nutritionals and branded generic medicines. Our 103,000 colleagues serve people in more than 160 countries.

Business Analyst/Data Scientist Manager

Will be filled as a senior analyst or manager dependent on skills and experience of the selected candidate.

At Abbott, we're committed to helping people live their best possible life through the power of health. For 130+ years, we've brought new products and technologies to the world -- in nutrition, diagnostics, medical devices, and branded generic pharmaceuticals -- that create more possibilities for more people at all stages of life. Today, 99,000 of us are working to help people live not just longer, but better, in the more than 150 countries we serve.

At Abbott Nutrition Division, we understand that proper nutrition is the foundation for living the best life possible. Thats why we develop science-based nutrition products to nourish your body at every stage of life. Our products, including Similac®, PediaSure®, Pedialyte®, Ensure®, Glucerna®, and ZonePerfect®, help babies and children grow, keep bodies strong and active, and support the unique nutrition needs of people with chronic illnesses to make every stage of life a healthy one. We sell our nutrition products to retailers and institutions such as hospitals, medical distributors, and long-term care facilities.

CORE JOB RESPONSIBILITIES:
Use analytic data techniques and statistical methods related to business analysis, data mining, design of experiments, and modeling, etc. to understand the business and recommend actions for improvements.
Collaborate with Analytics, Marketing, Sales, Marketing Research, Finance, and Contract Operations to identify and evaluate opportunities to utilize data analytics to maximize marketing and sales success.
Create and maintain forecasting models for Abbott and competitive brands for monthly and quarterly reporting to the cross-functional team and senior management.
Analyze monthly and quarterly sales, explain variance to market, sales and share forecasts, and present performance update to leadership
Develop and gain alignment on best visualization content that is in line with industry best practices and ease of user adoption to convey the story inside the data
Build dashboards and reports for business stakeholders and to support analytic tools
Complete ad-hoc requests to support tactical and strategic business needs
Communicate analysis and findings clearly to senior leaders and non-technical audiences
Manage monthly Institutional data stream and third-party relationships with vendors
Periodically work evenings and weekends to complete time-sensitive assignments
Basic Qualifications
2 to 10 years experience in data mining, forecasting, or other analytics
Experience with data visualization tools such as PowerBI or Tableau
Experience with statistical tools such as Excel Stat, SAS, R or Python
Excellent communication skills, both oral and written, and the ability to communicate technical analysis and findings clearly to senior leaders and non-technical audiences
BS in Business Analytics, Data Science, Computer Science, Math, Statistics, or related field
Preferred Qualifications
MS degree in Business Analytics, Data Science, Computer Science, Math, Statistics, or related field
Experience using SAS Enterprise Guide
Experience in time series and regression forecasting
Experience in Institutional Healthcare analytics
Experience with retail analytics, Nielsen, and IRI
Location
Columbus OH,OverviewFull Time/Benefits EligibleWe are seeking a Planning Analyst - Data Resource Center that is responsible for the programming/querying, summarization and dissemination of data. The position requires work with Planning, Regional Development, Community Wellness, other hospital departments, medical staff and external organizations to ensure the availability of timely and accurate information, upon which strategic and programmatic decisions will be made. Strong data skills, including SQL programming and relational database management are required. Types of reporting include patient volumes, budget projections, utilization management, business surveys, quality initiatives, and ad hoc requests.ResponsibilitiesWhy Nationwide Children's HospitalThe moment you walk through our doors, you can feel it. When you meet one of our patient families, you believe it. And when you talk with anyone who works here, you want to be part of it, too. Welcome to Nationwide Children's Hospital, where Passion Meets Purpose.Here, Everyone Matters. We're 13,000 strong. And it takes every single one of us to improve the lives of the kids we care for, and the kids from around the world we'll never even meet. Kids who are living healthier, fuller lives because of the knowledge we share. We know it takes a Collaborative Culture to deliver on our promise to provide the very best, innovative care and to foster new discoveries, made possible by the most groundbreaking research. Anywhere.Ask anyone with a Nationwide Children's badge what they do for a living. They'll tell you it's More Than a Job. It's a calling. It's a chance to use and grow your talent to make an impact that truly matters. Because here, we exist simply to help children everywhere.Nationwide Children's Hospital. A Place to Be Proud.What Will You Be Doing?Data Reporting* Writes SQL code to obtain relevant patient volume data and dashboards to provide meaningful information.* Supports production and evaluation of data for strategic plans, market assessments, business plans and quality measures.* Provides direct service to internal/external customers and responds to unexpected customer requests with a sense of urgency and positive action.* Analyzes healthcare utilization trends and performance of hospital/physician networks for efficient and timely healthcare delivery.* Supports physician data activities, including productivity/RVU benchmarking, physician activity and procedure logs for credentialing, clinical utilization management, Ongoing Professional Performance Evaluation, and ad hoc data requests.* Assists in forecasting demographics, demand for services and capacity for short and long-range strategic, programmatic and facility plans and processes.* Performs research and develops analyses of services by hospital and competitors, creating service line dashboards and competitor profile data sets.* Maintains knowledge of appropriate software and programming tools, including Business Objects/Web Intelligence, SQL, MS Excel, MS PowerPoint, Crystal Reports and mapping software.Information Assurance* Processes detailed information with good accuracy.* Utilizes accepted procedures for identifying data issues and testing solutions and data enhancements.* Understands data feeds from source systems and ensures data integrity by cross checking outputs.* Works directly with Information Services on data integrity issues and application development and communicates with others when a decision needs to be made.* Maintains strict adherence to all HIPAA rules and regulations regarding the confidentiality of patient information.* Strives to complete assignments according to established quality measures.Project Management* Participates in definition of scope and methodology for information requests by gathering information from stakeholders. Once developed, queries required data and presents it to requesting client in user-friendly format.* Participates in collaborative meetings and may serve as project coordinator (ie, mapping software, SharePoint,..etc).* Identifies key resources needed to fulfill responsibilities and seeks additional resources when necessary.* Applies concept of continuous improvement to develop new skills during change initiatives.* Recognizes changing demands and priorities; responds to day-to-day operational priorities while still making progress on project work.Teamwork, Collaboration, Professionalism and Leadership* Participates in collaborative meetings with other DRC and hospital staff to meet goals, objectives and responsibilities.* Fosters working relationships with leadership in service lines, data vendors, and regulatory agencies in the region and state.* Receives and uses feedback in order to enhance professional growth.* Presents data directly to service line committees and resolves common customer complaints, responding to unusual requests with a sense of urgency and positive action.* Fosters a team atmosphere in the Data Resource Center and other Hospital departments by interacting with others in an honest and straightforward manner, listening to and valuing the opinions and ideas of others, and helping others to accomplish goals.* Develops and maintains technical and professional skill levels.* Maintains a professional demeanor in conducting job duties and accepts responsibility for performance.* Provides training to other DRC staff members in area of specialty.QualificationsWhat Are We Looking For?* One to three years of academic and/or professional experience in data/statistical analysis (health care setting preferred).* Bachelor's degree required. Possible fields of study include Hospital/Health Administration, Business Administration, Planning, Statistics, Health Information Management, Health Informatics, Accounting, Finance, , Actuary Science or other related field required.* Familiarity with data management systems and extensive spreadsheet, database and presentation graphics knowledge are required. Skilled in relational database management, reporting software tools (Business Objects, Crystal Reports, SQL Developer), SQL programming, and MS Excel.* Familiarity with hospital coding systems (including ICD, CPT, MSDRG, APRDRG, CRG) as well as experience using medical terminology.* Analytical skills to assemble, evaluate and understand large and complex information sets, and to identify current and future trends.* Excellent communication and organizational skills to effectively interact with external contacts, administrators, medical staff, and employees at all levels.Your Benefits, Your Wellness:As an employer, Nationwide Children's recognizes the importance of the benefits we offer. We also recognize the importance of balancing your work and personal needs. Our benefits and Employee Wellness package is designed to:* Empower you to be a conscientious health care consumer through educational and wellness activities* Establish a work environment that promotes health and well-being* Support your financial protection and security in retirementMost of our positions are benefits' eligible from day 1.Minimum Physical Requirements:Sitting - Frequently Stooping - Occasionally Standing - Occasionally Talking on the phone or in person - Frequently Typing on a keyboard - Frequently Walking - Occasionally Position requires the ability to interact effectively with customers and information systems personnel across the organization. The above list of duties is intended to describe the general nature and level of work performed by individuals assigned to this classification. It is not to be construed as an exhaustive list of duties performed by the individual so classified, nor is it intended to limit or modify the right of any supervisor to assign, direct, and control the work of employees under his/her supervision.EOE/M/F/Disability/VetOptions,Professional

Position Purpose:
Analyze health management programs including: data collection, validation and outcome measurement. May include:
o Financial, pharmacy, claims, provider, and member data
o IRS, CMS, HHSC, HEDIS reporting
o Internal data cleansing and data reconciliation analysis
o Trend analysis in various functional areas of health care management.
Create and generate reports through MS-Excel, MS-Access, and SQL using Business Objects interface and direct links to core databases (ODS/EDW)
Produce reports for and interface with senior management and internal and external stakeholders.
Gather and interpret business requirements and monitor data trends to proactively identify issues
Execute data changes and update core systems as needed
Handle multiple projects and timelines effectively and communicate risks and issues to manager regularly
Assist with training lower level Data Analysts.
Responsible for analytical data needs. Handle complex data requests, reports, and predictive data modeling.

Knowledge/Experience:
Bachelors degrees related field or equivalent experience. 2+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience. Advanced knowledge of Business Objects, SQL, and Microsoft Applications, including Excel and Access.

Centene is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to diversity, and values the ways in which we are different. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other characteristic protected by applicable law.,Full Time/Benefits Eligible
*PhD preferred, or on track to obtain PhD within two years*
We are seeking a Data Statistics Analyst that will work alongside clinical Care Coordination staff in order to further the mission of Partners For Kids (PFK). PFK is a physician-hospital organization affiliated with Nationwide Children’s Hospital. PFK contracts with the Medicaid managed care plans in 34 counties in the central and southeast Medicaid regions for approximately 330,000 children. The Data Statistics Analyst will:
Identify and implement measurement methods that assess effectiveness of various interventions.
Create publications for peer reviewed journals and grant submissions on best practices
Provide statistical and methodical expertise, critical thinking and analysis skills

Why Nationwide Children’s Hospital
The moment you walk through our doors, you can feel it. When you meet one of our patient families, you believe it. And when you talk with anyone who works here, you want to be part of it, too. Welcome to Nationwide Children’s Hospital, where Passion Meets Purpose.
Here, Everyone Matters. We’re 13,000 strong. And it takes every single one of us to improve the lives of the kids we care for, and the kids from around the world we’ll never even meet. Kids who are living healthier, fuller lives because of the knowledge we share. We know it takes a Collaborative Culture to deliver on our promise to provide the very best, innovative care and to foster new discoveries, made possible by the most groundbreaking research. Anywhere.
Ask anyone with a Nationwide Children’s badge what they do for a living. They’ll tell you it’s More Than a Job. It’s a calling. It’s a chance to use and grow your talent to make an impact that truly matters. Because here, we exist simply to help children everywhere.
Nationwide Children’s Hospital. A Place to Be Proud.
What Will You Be Doing?
Work with Care Coordination teams to develop measures for monitoring interventions and clinical outcomes to evaluate the effectiveness of the care coordination program.
Conducts monthly/quarterly and annual regulatory reporting to Health Plans.
Utilizes existing datasets (Enterprise Data Warehouse, Claims Data Warehouse, comparative pediatric datasets) to run queries and summarize output needed for day to day operations of the care coordination program.
Participates in development of care coordination documentation modules in the Electronic Health Record in order to leverage EHR data in reporting.
Creates controls charts and graphs to visually depict process and outcome measures.
Tabulates and analyzes population health data by using statistical techniques in order to assess health status and program effectiveness.
Coordinates the selection and implementation of risk stratification tools.
Facilitates efforts to improve care coordination through tracking, trending, data collection, assessment of statistical process charts, follow up and communication.
Documents measures, designs and develops dashboards for data analysis using business intelligence tools.
Participates in research, scientific investigation, publication, and grant writing activities related to care coordination and population health.
Collaborates with hospital/medical /care coordination staff to systematically collect and analyze a variety of data, creating and interpreting data displays, and creating summaries.
Participates in improving decision support through recommending areas or approaches for improvement activities, performing new procedures, collecting data and providing input to department discussions.
Participates in research, scientific investigation, publication, and grant writing activities related to care coordination and population health.
Ensures that integrity of data being reported is accurate and valid.

What Are We Looking For?
KNOWLEDGE , SKILLS AND ABILITIES REQUIRED
Master's Degree in Public Health, Health Services Administration, Statistics, Quantitative Analysis or Epidemiology or related field. PhD is preferred, or on track to obtain PhD within two years.
Knowledge of statistical process control principles and at least three years' experience in extracting and analyzing data via SQL/SAS/SPSS and business intelligence tools.
Demonstrates the ability to analyze and interpret statistical data.
Experience analyzing claims and reporting on health outcomes is highly preferred.
Excellent interpersonal and organizational skills necessary to present and communication important information effectively to all levels of hospital staff.
Your Benefits, Your Wellness:
As an employer, Nationwide Children’s recognizes the importance of the benefits we offer. We also recognize the importance of balancing your work and personal needs. Our benefits and Employee Wellness package is designed to:
Empower you to be a conscientious health care consumer through educational and wellness activities
Establish a work environment that promotes health and well-being
Support your financial protection and security in retirement
Most of our positions are benefits’ eligible from day 1.
Minimum Physical Requirements:
Typing on a keyboard Frequently (34-66%)Talking in person/on the phone Frequently (34-66%)Standing/walking Frequently (34-66%) The above list of duties is intended to describe the general nature and level of work performed by individuals assigned to this classification. It is not to be construed as an exhaustive list of duties performed by the individual so classified, nor is it intended to limit or modify the right of any supervisor to assign, direct, and control the work of employees under his/her supervision.
EOE M/F/Disability/Vet,Abbott is a global healthcare leader that helps people live more fully at all stages of life. Our portfolio of life-changing technologies spans the spectrum of healthcare, with leading businesses and products in diagnostics, medical devices, nutritionals and branded generic medicines. Our 103,000 colleagues serve people in more than 160 countries.
JOB DESCRIPTION:


At Abbott, we're committed to helping people live their best possible life through the power of health. For 130+ years, we've brought new products and technologies to the world -- in nutrition, diagnostics, medical devices, and branded generic pharmaceuticals -- that create more possibilities for more people at all stages of life. Today, 99,000 of us are working to help people live not just longer, but better, in the more than 150 countries we serve.

At Abbott Nutrition Division, we understand that proper nutrition is the foundation for living the best life possible. That’s why we develop science-based nutrition products to nourish your body at every stage of life. Our products, including Similac®, PediaSure®, Pedialyte®, Ensure®, Glucerna®, and ZonePerfect®, help babies and children grow, keep bodies strong and active, and support the unique nutrition needs of people with chronic illnesses — to make every stage of life a healthy one. We sell our nutrition products to retailers and institutions such as hospitals, medical distributors, and long-term care facilities.

Core Job Responsibilities for the Data Scientist/Programmer, Sr. Analyst:
Collaborate with cross functional and non-technical partners to evaluate opportunities to utilize data analytics to maximize marketing and sales success
Leverage machine learning to help create applications that solve eCommerce business problems
Create powerful business intelligence tools to provide stakeholders with easily consumable, actionable information/insights
Develop algorithms that help to automatically identify critical business issues
Develop and gain alignment on best visualization content that is in line with industry best practices and ease of user adoption to convey the story inside the data
Complete ad-hoc requests to support tactical and strategic business needs
Communicate analysis and findings clearly to senior leaders and non-technical audiences
Basic Qualifications
2 to 10 years’ experience in data science, machine learning, computer science, and/or analytics
Significant experience in at least one of the following programming languages: R, C#, Python, SQL
Experience with data visualization tools such as PowerBI or Tableau
Excellent communication skills, both oral and written, and the ability to communicate technical analysis and findings clearly to senior leaders and non-technical audiences
BS in Business Analytics, Data Science, Computer Science, Math, Statistics, or related field
Preferred Qualifications
MS degree in Business Analytics, Data Science, Computer Science, Math, Statistics, or related field
Some familiarity with JavaScript, CSS, HTML, and C#
Experience with Machine Learning platforms such as Amazon SageMaker, Google Cloud AI, etc.
Familiarity with Selenium or any other web-based automation tool
Location
Columbus OH
JOB FAMILY:
Market Development and Research
DIVISION:
ANPD Nutrition Products
LOCATION:
United States > Columbus : RP02 Floor-2
ADDITIONAL LOCATIONS:
WORK SHIFT:
Standard
TRAVEL:
Not specified
MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE:
No
SIGNIFICANT WORK ACTIVITIES:
Continuous sitting for prolonged periods (more than 2 consecutive hours in an 8 hour day), Keyboard use (greater or equal to 50% of the workday)Abbott is an Equal Opportunity Employer of Minorities/Women/Individuals with Disabilities/Protected Veterans.EEO is the Law link - English: http://webstorage.abbott.com/common/External/EEO_English.pdfEEO is the Law link - Espanol: http://webstorage.abbott.com/common/External/EEO_Spanish.pdf,Professional

Position Purpose: Responsible for analytic data needs of the business unit. Handle complex data projects and acts as a lead for other Data Analysts.
Provide advanced analytical support for business operations in all or some of the following areas: claims, provider data, member data, clinical data, HEDIS, pharmacy, external reporting
Extract, load, model, and reconcile large amounts of data across multiple system platforms and sources
Review data to determine operational impacts and needed actions; elevate issues, trends, areas for improvement and opportunities to management.
Develop reports and deliverables for management
Model data using MS Excel, Access, SQL, and/or other data ware house analytical tools
Ensure compliance with federal and state deliverable reporting requirements by performing data quality audits and analysis.
Assist with training and mentoring other Data Analysts.
Education/Experience: Bachelors degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of Enterprise Reporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation.

Preferred: Population Health Analytics experience including pharmacy acumen

Centene is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to diversity, and values the ways in which we are different. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other characteristic protected by applicable law.,Full Time/Benefits Eligible
PhD preferred, or on track to obtain PhD within two years*
We are seeking a Data Statistics Analyst that will work alongside clinical Care
Coordination staff in order to further the mission of Partners For Kids (PFK).
PFK is a physician-hospital organization affiliated with Nationwide
Children s Hospital. PFK contracts with the Medicaid managed care plans in
counties in the central and southeast Medicaid regions for approximately
330,000 children. The Data Statistics Analyst will:
Identify and implement measurement methods that assess effectiveness of
various interventions.
Create publications for peer reviewed journals and grant submissions on
best practices
Provide statistical and methodical expertise, critical thinking and
analysis skills

What Will You Be Doing?
Work with Care Coordination teams to develop measures for monitoring
interventions and clinical outcomes to evaluate the effectiveness of the
care coordination program.
Conducts monthly/quarterly and annual regulatory reporting to Health
Plans.
Utilizes existing datasets (Enterprise Data Warehouse, Claims Data
Warehouse, comparative pediatric datasets) to run queries and summarize
output needed for day to day operations of the care coordination program.
Participates in development of care coordination documentation modules in
the Electronic Health Record in order to leverage EHR data in reporting.
Creates controls charts and graphs to visually depict process and outcome
measures.
Tabulates and analyzes population health data by using statistical
techniques in order to assess health status and program effectiveness.
Coordinates the selection and implementation of risk stratification
tools.
Facilitates efforts to improve care coordination through tracking,
trending, data collection, assessment of statistical process charts,
follow up and communication.
Documents measures, designs and develops dashboards for data analysis
using business intelligence tools.
Participates in research, scientific investigation, publication, and
grant writing activities related to care coordination and population
health.
Collaborates with hospital/medical /care coordination staff to
systematically collect and analyze a variety of data, creating and
interpreting data displays, and creating summaries.
Participates in improving decision support through recommending areas or
approaches for improvement activities, performing new procedures,
collecting data and providing input to department discussions.
Participates in research, scientific investigation, publication, and
grant writing activities related to care coordination and population
health.
Ensures that integrity of data being reported is accurate and valid.
What Are We Looking For?
To fulfill this role successfully, you must possess these minimum
qualifications and experience:
Master's Degree in Public Health, Health Services Administration,
Statistics, Quantitative Analysis or Epidemiology or related field. PhD
is preferred, or on track to obtain PhD within two years.
Knowledge of statistical process control principles and at least three
years' experience in extracting and analyzing data via SQL/SAS/SPSS and
business intelligence tools.
Demonstrates the ability to analyze and interpret statistical data.
Experience analyzing claims and reporting on health outcomes is highly
preferred.
Excellent interpersonal and organizational skills necessary to present
and communication important information effectively to all levels of
hospital staff.

Minimum Physical Requirements:
Typing on a keyboard Frequently (34-66%)Talking in person/on the phone
Frequently (34-66%)Standing/walking Frequently (34-66%) The above list of
duties is intended to describe the general nature and level of work
performed by individuals assigned to this classification. It is not to be
construed as an exhaustive list of duties performed by the individual so
classified, nor is it intended to limit or modify the right of any
supervisor to assign, direct, and control the work of employees under
his/her supervision.

EOE/M/F/Disability/Vet,At OrthoCarolina, our team is our greatest asset and the foundation of our success; we share a common passion for making lives better. We are a diverse group of individuals, accountable to each other through the backbone of our beliefs: trust, honesty and mutual respect; ensuring our voice is heard. Our positive environment supports individual growth and a sense of belonging. Our employees work together to uphold the standards of excellence and promote and environment of teamwork throughout the organization.

If these attributes align with the job culture you are seeking - then OrthoCarolina might be the right fit for you!

We are currently searching for a Quality Data Analyst at our Park Rd location.

The Quality Data Analyst gathers and examines complex data to create actionable reports to internal stakeholders. They also monitor performance and quality control plans to identify issues or provide improvement options for systems and database designs. This role requires collaborating with key stakeholders to implement effective automation processes by developing queries and reports to mine data for quality control and accuracy. Data quality analysts typically serve as an adjunctive member to multiple departments or teams. This role suits people who enjoy working with numbers and data sets, have an aptitude for computer systems and software, and have strong analytical abilities.

A career at OrthoCarolina will provide you with opportunities for career advancement, dedicated peer support, and continuing education. Our company is committed to providing our employees with the utmost positive work environment. Additional benefits as a Certified Medical Assistant include:
Competitive salary package
Health, Dental, and Vision insurance
Health Savings Account
Life insurance
Short/Long term disability insurance
Tuition Reimbursement
Voluntary Home/Auto insurance
Voluntary Accident/Cancer insurance
Voluntary Legal Shield/Identity Theft
Health Advocate – Employee Benefit Resource
401(k) retirement plan
Profit sharing plan
OrthoCarolina is one of the nation’s leading independent academic orthopedics practices serving North Carolina and the Southeast since 1922. OrthoCarolina provides compassionate and comprehensive musculoskeletal care including operative and non-operative care, diagnostic imaging and rehabilitative therapy. Widely known for musculoskeletal research and training, OrthoCarolina physicians have specialized expertise in foot and ankle, hip and knee, shoulder and elbow, spine, sports medicine, hand, pediatric orthopedics, and physical medicine and rehabilitation. We commit to improving the lives of all we serve, by providing premier patient care and compassionate, personalized service. Over 300 OrthoCarolina providers see more than one million patient visits throughout North and South Carolina each year.

OrthoCarolina. You. Improved.

Employee Type
Regular
Qualifications
Skills
Education
Certifications
Language
Work Experience,Job Summary and Scope

The Data Integration Analyst is primarily responsible for taking business requirements and converting them into data specifications for data integration. They are also deeply involved with the design, implementation and support of on-going data integration processes.

Essential Functions

The Data Integration Specialist is responsible for (though not limited to):

Responsibilities and Duties:
Create and maintain EDI and data integration maps to ensure compliance to business and technical requirements.
Receive and understand business requirements and create data mapping specification(s)
Prepare and maintain test data, develop and test maps, and verify results
Implement EDI and data integration maps that meet specifications and timelines
Analyze the data exchanged with any outside sources
Assist in monitoring Inbound and Outbound data files leveraging available tools and reporting.
Record and assist in resolving errors in EDI and data integration processes
Address issues as they surface while communicating with all parties impacted.
Understanding and use of SQL databases and HIPAA EDI transaction sets and additional data sources
Perform other duties as may be required by management
Challenge status-quo and drive creativity, innovation and operational excellence.

Knowledge, Skills and Abilities:
Strong knowledge with Microsoft SQL Server technologies (SQL queries).
Experience with Agile development techniques.
Strong analytical, problem solving & general management skills.
Excellent communication skills.
Ability to gather data integration and data ingestion requirements from a variety of structured, semi-structured, and streaming data sources and effectively recommend solutions
Ability to discuss tradeoffs in on-premise and cloud-based approaches, understand data transmission requirements, and suggest viable approaches
Ability to communicate with lines of business and technical audiences
Experience working in the healthcare industry, with a focus on medical claims is a plus.
Ability to work independently in a fast paced, changing environment
Possess strong organizational skills and the ability to prioritize work and meet deadlines
Excellent interpersonal, oral and written communication skills
Knowledge of FHIR is a plus
Knowledge of Python is a plus
Knowledge of JSON is a plus

Qualifications

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

Education and Work Experience

Education:
Bachelor's degree, preferably in Computer Science, Business or Statistics or equivalent Professional Experience
Experience:
2+ years hands-on experience working with a Claims processing system
3+ years' experience with Microsoft SQL Server
2+ years' experience creating Source to Target mappings
Solid understanding of HIPAA, PHI, data security, and encryption

Working Conditions:

This is an office-based position which primarily occurs during normal business hours. Cardinal Innovations reserves the right to call upon this employee during non-business hours as needed to meet the demands of the position.

Valid Driver's License Required:

No

Travel Type:

None Required

Percentage: None

English

Read Write Speak

Spanish

Other:

Licensure and/or Certification

Equal Opportunity Employer/ Protected Veteran/ Individuals with Disabilities

Cardinal Innovations is firmly committed to the policy of providing equal employment opportunity (EEO) to all of its employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, age, color, sex, religion, creed, veteran status, genetic information, national origin, non-job related disability, sexual orientation, and/or gender identity or expression (except as mandated by law). Employment at Cardinal is based solely on a person's merit and qualifications directly related to professional competence. For that reason, we consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. Our equal employment opportunity philosophy complies with federal, state and local law and applies to all aspects of employment with Cardinal, including recruiting, hiring, training, transfer/promotion, compensation, benefits and termination.

If you have a disability or special need that requires accommodation, please let us know by contacting Cardinal's Human Resources department at (see application details) Someone from the HR team will reach out to see how we may be able to assist.

Physical Demands/ Working Conditions

Physical Demands

Walking, Standing, Sitting, Stooping

Constantly

Balancing, Lifting, Carrying, Pushing, Pulling

Rarely

Climbing, Kneeling, Crouching

Rarely

Reaching, Handling, Grasping, Feeling

Frequently

Talking, Hearing

Constantly

Repetitive Motions

Constantly

Coordination: Eye, Hand, Foot

Rarely

Working Conditions

Extreme Temperature Cold/ Heat

N/A

Humidity

N/A

Wet

N/A

Noise

Rarely

Hazards

N/A

Vibration

N/A

Other:

N/A

Valid Driver's License Required:

No

Travel Type:

None Required

Percentage: None,Hinge Health is pioneering the world's most patient-centered digital hospital, starting with musculoskeletal health. MSK conditions are the #1 medical spend for US employers. Hinge Health is finally making it easier to bring expert-recommended care to millions of patients by being the first company to combine wearable-sensor guided exercise therapy with 1-on-1 health coaching and patient education. Only Hinge Health has clinically validated outcomes across 4 peer-reviewed studies showing reductions in: chronic pain, opioid use, anxiety, depression, absenteeism, and costly surgeries.

4 in 5 employers with a digital MSK solution partner with Hinge Health and we’re poised to triple our customer base again in 2020. Hinge Health has raised $126M to date and has 300+ employees across our San Francisco, Portland, Minneapolis, Chicago, and remote offices.

You’ll play a key role in analyzing data generated by our users as well as providing insights for a wide variety of internal teams (Product, Growth, Clinical, Commercial, Finance, Research) and large enterprise customers. You will be a highly-visible, trusted partner to many of our most important decision makers. This is a fantastic opportunity to join our fast-growing Data team and shape how Hinge Health puts its data to use.
WHAT YOU'LL ACCOMPLISH
Build and maintain key company dashboards in Mode, our primary BI tool
Lead analysis and drawing conclusions from user-focused experiments
Collaborate directly with stakeholders to deeply understand their data needs
Set definitions and write SQL queries that go directly into our roll-up tables/views
Work closely with our (data) engineering team to improve data models and flag issues
Ad hoc analyses as needed for high-priority/visibility items
WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR
3+ years experience in a cross-functional, data analysis role
SQL proficiency required; Python a nice-to-have
Prior experience with BI/visualization tools (Mode, Tableau, Looker, etc.) a must
Familiarity with applied statistics pertaining to hypothesis-driven experiments
Enjoys working cross-functionally with any business unit, from Product to Commercial
Pairs understanding of high-level business/product problems with advanced analysis
Can lead on most any type of analysis and produce prototypes/insights within hours
Patience when working with multiple, diverse stakeholders simultaneously
A high attention to detail and the ability to QA data at a glance or in depth
Ability to work autonomously and with minimal guidance

BONUS POINTS
BA/BS, preferably in Business Analysis, Applied Statistics, or similar focus area
Experience analyzing medical claims and codes (ICD-10, CPT, 835/837)
Hands-on data engineering/ETL experience
WHAT SHAPES OUR COMPANY
Trust: We trust our teammates to always act in the team and company’s best interest.
Hustle: We’re creative, we’re unrelenting, we find a way.
Effective communication: We’re prompt and concise.
Learn-it-all (vs know-it-all): We’re always willing to learn.
Frugal: We don’t waste money and especially not time.
WHAT YOU'LL LOVE ABOUT US
Competitive compensation with meaningful stock options
Medical, Dental, Vision, Disability and Life Insurance (We cover 100% of your premium and 75% for your dependents)
401K match
3 months paid parental leave
Daily lunch
Professional development budget
Monthly fitness/gym reimbursement
Annual mental wellness benefit
Noise-cancelling headphones
Work from home policy
Opportunity to join a fantastically talented, diverse, and passionate team at a pivotal time in the company’s lifecycle
If you're interested - we'd love to hear from you. No recruiters, please.

Hinge Health is proud to be an Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, gender (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics.

We celebrate diversity and are committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees.,About Us:

PlushCare is a premier VC backed company innovating healthcare by providing easier access to high quality healthcare. Our mission is to provide patients with the best experience and the best doctors. Our technology platform enables over 200K patients (and growing!) to talk to a doctor who has trained at a top 50 US medical institution from the convenience of their phone or computer. It's high quality primary care that puts the patient at the center. With the highest NPS of 90 and an App Store rating of 4.9, we strive to provide the healthcare experience that patients deserve. We're growing rapidly and looking for people to join our passionate team.

About the Role:

As a Business Data Analyst at PlushCare you will have the opportunity to work closely with Marketing, Product, and Finance, helping them measure their impact and guide their strategic decisions. You'll dive into complex datasets to analyze trends, identify opportunities and quantify the potential value of new initiatives. You will be a member of our cross-functional data team.

Responsibilities
Develop, publish, and maintain Tableau dashboards and reports.
Develop and implement Tableau data hygiene best practices.
Gather and interpret data to measure business performance and drive decision making.
Work with data and software engineers to ensure high data quality.
Manage multiple analysis projects across departments and adapt to shifting priorities.
Proliferate a data-driven culture at PlushCare.
Required Qualifications:
Educational background in engineering, mathematics, or economics.
3+ years working with Tableau
Excellent quantitative and data analytics skills.
Proficient in SQL (Redshift, MySQL)
Proficient in Excel/Google Sheets (pivot tables, VLOOKUP, statistical functions)
Strong data communicator.
Experience working cross functionally, particularly Marketing, Finance, and Product.
What we offer:
90% Company-paid health, dental, vision
401(k) plan, commuter benefits
Flexible PTO
Fun, diverse, open-minded coworkers
Free lunch when onsite
We are proud to embrace a diverse & inclusive workplace and are committed to equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, gender identity or Veteran status.,Research Data Analyst III

19-Jun-2020

Job Code and Payroll Title
6257 Research Data Analyst III

Job Summary
JOB OVERVIEW
The Research Data Analyst performs quality checks on cancer registry data and conducts data analysis in support of cancer research studies, maintains large research databases, responds to requests for confidential cancer data and cancer statistics, communicates cancer information and statistics in written and online publications of varying formats. Works independently and as part of the Surveillance Research team. Conducts analyses, interprets results, prepares data for dissemination via peer-reviewed journals, scientific and community meetings, and co-authors scientific manuscripts.

The Research Data Analyst uses skills as a seasoned, experienced research professional with a full understanding of statistical analyses, research software programming techniques, and application of epidemiologic principles. Provides research support to internal and external investigators/faculty in cancer surveillance projects and publications. Contributes to development of grant proposals. Demonstrates good judgment in selecting methods and techniques for obtaining solutions.

DEPARTMENT OF EPIDEMIOLOGY AND BIOSTATISTICS
The Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics (DEB), housed within the UCSF School of Medicine (SOM), has a vision to advance discoveries and insights into the distribution, determinants and outcomes of disease that will drive improvements in population health worldwide.

The DEB has three missions: 1) education, 2) science, and 3) research. Its educational mission is to train students in epidemiologic and biostatistical methods for studying disease etiology and prevention, evaluating tests and treatments, and using evidence-based approaches in clinical practice and population health. The scientific mission of the DEB is to perform outstanding basic, clinical and population health research along a spectrum from molecules to society and to develop tools for the translation of knowledge that will improve clinical practice and population health and ensure optimal use of resources. The clinical mission of the Department is to support the practice of public health and preventive medicine in local, state, national and international health agencies.

ABOUT UCSF
The University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It is the only campus in the 10-campus UC system dedicated exclusively to the health sciences.

Organization
Campus

Req Number
55429BR

Location
Mission Hall - Mission Bay

Job Title
Research Data Analyst

Appointment Type
Career

Percentage
100%

Shift Length
8 Hours

Shift
Days

Work Days
Monday - Friday, 8:30 am - 5:30 pm (flexible)

Required Qualifications
• Bachelor's degree in related area and three+ years of related experience, or equivalent combination of experience/training
• Knowledge of following software/applications: Link Plus, SQL
• Thorough knowledge of research function
• Thorough skills in statistical analysis, systems programming, database design and data security measures
• Thorough skills in analysis and consultation
• Outstanding computer skills and working knowledge of statistical software packages including SAS. Experience with merging files, creating variables, data manipulation, basic macros, and basic reporting
• Understands and can interpret issues surrounding confidentiality from the policies and procedures of the regional cancer registry and the state
• Skills to communicate complex information in a clear and concise manner both verbally and in writing
• Ability to work independently and work well with others
• Strong organizational skills, attention to detail, and able to work systematically

Preferred Qualifications
• Master’s degree in epidemiology or related field
• Knowledge of the following software/applications: MS Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook)

License/Certification
n/a

Position Type
Full Time

Department Name
Epidemiology and Biostatistics

Equal Employment Opportunity
The University of California San Francisco is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran or disabled status, or genetic information.,Bioinformatics Programmer III

02-Jul-2020

Job Code and Payroll Title
9401 Bioinformatics Programmer III

Job Summary
JOB OVERVIEW
UCSF is seeking a person to serve as a Data Systems Analyst at UCSF Cancer Immunotherapy Program (CIP), working in the laboratories of Dr. Lawrence Fong and Dr. David Oh. The job function involves developing and utilizing computational tools to analyze and interpret biological or other research data and includes utilizing and developing algorithms, computational techniques, and statistical methodologies. The Data Systems Analyst will help in the design of new experiments, implements end-user needs in database searching and integration. Additionally, the Data Systems Analyst should be able to provide web-based bioinformatics and access to public and proprietary databases and teach established in-house pipelines to researchers.

The position involves establishing pipelines using existing computer algorithms for the analysis of RNA, DNA and TCR sequencing as well as Cytof data. The position will also involve developing new algorithms and pipelines as needed, commencing with but not limited to single cell RNA and TCR sequencing of immune cells from immunotherapy-treated and untreated cancer patients. The candidate will be expected to make independent and innovative contributions to a variety of experimental analyses that may lead to contributions to scientific publications. Eventually, the candidate will implement end-user needs for everyone in the laboratory to be able to use the algorithms in the pipeline for large scale studies.

DIVISION OF HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY / MEDICINE
The Division of Hematology/Oncology is one of the largest Divisions in the Department of Medicine (DOM). Currently, the Division has 80 + Full-time faculty, 18 part-time and/or volunteer faculty, 26 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and non-ACGME fellows, 13 post-doctoral fellows, 32 Non faculty appointments and 57 administrative and research staff. The Division’s primary research, clinical and teaching functions are primarily split between the Parnassus, Mission Bay and Mount Zion campuses, although the faculty, fellows, and staff have appointments and clinical, research, and educational activities at San Francisco General Hospital (SFGH), and Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC).

Working closely with UCSF Cancer Immunotherapy Program (CIP) at the UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center (HDFCCC) comprising of the Cancer Immunotherapy Clinic and the Cancer Immunotherapy Lab on the Parnassus Campus, brings together expert UCSF physicians from across all cancer sub-specialties, to work closely with scientists from UCSF and beyond to develop the cancer treatments of the future.

ABOUT UCSF
The University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It is the only campus in the 10-campus UC system dedicated exclusively to the health sciences.

Organization
Campus

Req Number
55489BR

Location
UCSF Parnassus

Job Title
Data Systems Analyst

Appointment Type
Career

Percentage
100%

Shift Length
8 Hours

Shift
Days

Work Days
Monday – Friday, 8:00 AM – 5:00 PM

Required Qualifications
• Bachelor's degree in biological science, computational/programming, or related area and three to five years of experience, or equivalent experience/training
• Thorough knowledge of bioinformatics methods and data structures
• Thorough knowledge of bioinformatics programming design, modification and implementation
• Thorough skills associated with statistical analysis and systems programming
• Experienced with Unix
• Experienced with R programming
• Knowledge of relevant biology
• Ability to produce high-quality reports and documentation

Preferred Qualifications
• Master's degree in biological science, computational/programming
• Advanced degree in Information Technology or related discipline
• Experienced with open-source development (e.g. maintenance, contributions)
• Experienced with compute clusters and job schedulers
• Experienced with version control (e.g. Git) and corresponding repositories (e.g. GitHub)
• Experience with cloud computing
• Skills to communicate complex information in a clear and concise manner both verbally and in writing
• Skilled in Tableau or other data visualization tools, SQL tables, queries and stored procedures, Python or other programming language(s)
• Familiarity with ETL processes, VBA in MS Excel or MS Access, charting/visualizations using MS Excel
• Demonstrated ability to communicate technical information to technical and non-technical personnel at various levels in the organization
• Demonstrated ability to work with others from diverse backgrounds. Demonstrated effective communication and interpersonal skills. Demonstrated service orientation skills
• Self-motivated and works independently and as part of a team
• Demonstrated strong problem-solving skills. Able to learn effectively and meet deadlines
• Critical thinking skills and attention to detail

License/Certification
n/a

Position Type
Full Time

Department Name
Medicine / Hematology / Oncology

Equal Employment Opportunity
The University of California San Francisco is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran or disabled status, or genetic information.,Omada Health is on a mission to inspire and engage people in lifelong health, one step at a time.

Job overview

As a Data Analyst, you'll use large data sets in the world to build tools and answer questions that drive key business decisions across the entire company. What drives users to come to Omada? How can we improve our marketing outreach and on-boarding experience to bring individuals to Omada for their care? We need a data analyst to help us turn the challenges of user acquisition and retention into clear and undeniable recommendations for action.

About you:
3+ years experience working with user activity data in a business analytics context required
Experience with Marketo, Eloqua, Hubspot, or a related tool
Expert-level SQL, Tableau, and Excel skills
Experience accessing and manipulating database data using Python
Ability to design analyses and experiments that produce actionable results fast
Brilliant communication skills and ability to explain complex ideas clearly to a nontechnical audience
Bachelor's degree in statistics, computer science, business analytics, or a related field
Your impact:
Partner with Marketing, Engineering and Product Management to analyze the health of our technology and prioritize potential projects
Dive deep into user behavior on Omada's website and apps to discover what best encourages search engines to rank us highly, and users to return for a second visit
Craft and deliver presentations on the state of user growth, or on the results of recent analysis, to Product and Engineering teams and to the C-level executive team
Help create strategic A/B tests and correctly analyze often-complex results
You will love this job if you are:
Passionate about data and data analytics - going beyond the "What?" to understand the "Why" and "What if"
Excited and challenged by being at the forefront of bringing together health care and technology.
Benefits:
Competitive salary
Stock options (extended post termination option exercise window for Omadans who are with us 3 years or more)
Flexible vacation to help you rest, recharge, and connect with loved ones
Generous parental leave
Health, dental, and vision insurance (and above market employer contributions)
401k retirement savings plan
Stipend for professional development
Two giftable Omada enrollments per calendar year
Healthy snacks and meals
Wellness events (e.g. running club)
Community volunteering opportunities, plus one day off per year to volunteer
...and more!,Summary:

The Marin City Health and Wellness Center’s (MCHWC) Data Analyst will support an ongoing analysis of health data information. He/she and is responsible for developing and implementing data information systems to obtain, verify, and prepare data information to support healthcare programs, state and federal mandated reports, grant related activities, quality improvement, and other ad hoc reporting needs. The Data Analyst is also responsible to support, coordinate, and ensure clinic staff is trained on all reporting tools as needed.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
Work with the Quality Improvement and Risk Manager in developing and implementing systems to obtain, verify and prepare data information
Enter data into spreadsheets and web-based reporting tools as needed
Develop tables, graphs and reports
Organize data and reports for compliance, quality improvement, and program development
Track and report on key performance and quality improvement measures
Update the inventory of reporting metrics and quality improvement measures associated with organizational priorities and grant requirements
Maintain access to Clinic’s electronic health records (EHRs) and health center reporting tools
Support, coordinate, and ensure training of staff on data validation and reporting tools as needed
Perform other duties as directed, developed, or assigned
Supervisory Responsibility: N/A

Qualification Requirements:

Education and/or Experience:
Bachelor’s degree in computer science, public health or a field that requires research and strong analytical skills; or the equivalent professional experience
Minimum of 2 years work related experience in healthcare
Experience analyzing data in a healthcare environment
Outstanding presentation, verbal and written communication skills
Ability to express complex technical and analytical concepts to non-technical management
and staff.
Able to multi-task in a dynamic fast paced environment with minimal supervision
Advanced understanding of HIPAA.
Basic database or SQL knowledge
Proficient computer skills and Microsoft Office, including pivot tables/excel, word, power point, Outlook, etc.
Strong organization skills and attention to detail
Language Skill:
Must possess excellent organization, writing, and verbal skills
English proficiency required; Spanish proficiency preferred
Reasoning ability:
Ability to interpret a variety of instructions furnished in written, oral, diagram, or schedule form.
Equipment/Machinery: Fax machine, copier, personal computer, telephone, calculator, Microsoft Word/Excel, EHR system, and other software as required.

Physical Demands: The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an individual to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
Stand and walk or sit alternatively depending on specific needs of day. Estimate 20% of time is spent on feet and 80% sitting at desk.
Have occasional need to perform the following physical activities: bend/stoop/squat, climb stairs, push or pull, reach above shoulders.
Have occasional need to perform standing and walking activities.
Constant need to perform the following physical activities: writing/typing, grasping/turning, finger dexterity.
Lifting/carrying over 10 pounds occasionally. Lifting/carrying less than 10 pounds frequently.
Vision requirements: constant need to complete forms, read reports, view computer screen. Frequent need to see small detail. Frequent need to see things clearly beyond arm's reach.
Hearing requirements: constant need to communicate over telephone and in person.
Travel Requirements: Local travel to multiple MCHWC locations required. Occasional travel for training, seminars, etc.

Work Environment:

The noise level in the work environment is usually moderate.

Benefits: We currently offer 100% premium paid Medical and Dental benefits (**employee coverage only), 403(b) plan plus financial advisors, $1500.00 CE Benefits annually plus up to five days paid off for continuing education, up to $500 reimbursed for professional license fees and certifications required to serve and treat our patients, 9 paid holidays, 80 hours PTO for 1st through 2nd year of employment (increasing to 120 hours 3rd year of employment).

Marin City Health and Wellness Center is an approved National Health Service Corps site.,At Vida, our mission is to eradicate chronic disease and transform people's lives through improved health. There is huge potential to make an impact: 1 in 3 people in the U.S. has a chronic health condition, while 1 in 4 struggles with mental illness. Chronic conditions also represent a huge market opportunity at ~80% of our nation's $3T in annual healthcare spend.Vida is transforming healthcare through digital therapeutic programs and one-on-one health coaching and therapy to help individuals prevent, manage, and overcome chronic conditions.We apply data science and a human touch to drive a highly personalized experience through our easy-to-use mobile app. Our unique approach drives high user engagement, behavior change, and proven clinical outcomes.Vida serves employees/members of Fortune 500 companies, large national payers, and leading health systems. We have both a B2C and B2B revenue model.Our Data Analysts perform a critical role at Vida. Their analyses are used to improve the core Vida product experience, especially towards understanding and improving our impact on Vida's users' behavior and their clinical health outcomes. You will collaborate closely with every team at the company but working especially closely with our Finance team to assist with building financial models to help us understand further how we can deliver the best value to our customers.The position is full-time and based in San Francisco at the Vida HQ. Candidates should be local to the SF Bay Area.Responsibilities:* Create and publish standard, ad hoc reports with a high degree of accuracy, using internal and external data (e.g. customer, user, revenue, product, market, industry) to derive insights that will drive business decisions.* Become the data representative of multiple large enterprise clients, managing the intake of data and reporting requests from both internal and external stakeholders, supporting and prioritizing their requests for reports based on importance, urgency, and scope of impact.* Support our finance teams with building models and reports to support billing activities and predicting revenue growth.* Contribute to our overall data strategy to ensure the data team's tools and process evolve as the company grows in order to support our ever-increasing customer base.* Negotiate details such as data point definitions and formulas to ensure consistent reporting across partnered groups.* Design and develop automated reporting solutions to enable stakeholders to manage the business and make effective decisions.* Explore data through funnels, cohort analyses, trends, user segmentation, regression models and more.* Work with internal data engineering and data science teams to support causal and predictive analysisBasic Qualifications:* Bachelor's or Master's degree in an analytical field (e.g. Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics, Finance or Statistics)* 3+ years of experience in data analytics, including working with financial data* Exceptional SQL skills and experience writing complex queriesAdvanced proficiency of data visualization tools such as Tableau, Looker, Power BI, Data Studio, etc* Ability to work independently, manage multiple projects and deliver results in a fast-paced, cross-functional environment.Preferred Qualifications:* Prior experience working with reporting and modeling financial data with experience using statistical tools such as Python/R, SAS, Excel, etc.* Knowledge of working on cloud-based data platforms - like Google Big Query or AWS Redshift.* Analytical skills, with experience solving ambiguous problems using data and providing practical business insights.* Experience leading data-driven projects from definition through interpretation and execution.* Interpersonal skills with demonstrated ability to present technical content to general audiences* Working knowledge of Unix command-line/shell, git and pull requests.* Experience working on data-driven products.* Bonus: experience working on wearable or health-tracking products or datasets.* Previous startup experience or previous experience in a healthcare company, a strong plus.Benefits & Perks:* Competitive compensation including stock options* A health-oriented office culture including walking 1:1s, healthy food & snacks, fitness challenges, and weekly team runs and Yoga classes* Health, Vision, Dental Benefits* Vacation time and company paid holidaysABOUT VIDA HEALTH: Vida is a next generation continuous care platform for both consumers and businesses, combining a consumer mobile app, an enterprise care platform offering on demand 24/7 solutions for chronic conditions. Vida platform runs in the cloud, captures real-time data from 100+ devices and apps, and integrates back to the employer, payer, and provider. 133 million people in the U.S. live with a chronic condition, 70% of the $3T healthcare spend in the U.S. goes to preventable chronic conditions.Vida is proud to be an Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer.Diversity is more than a commitment at Vida-it is the foundation of what we do. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, ancestry, religion, gender, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, genetics, disability, age, or Veteran status. We also consider qualified applicants with criminal histories, consistent with applicable federal, state and local law.We seek to recruit, develop and retain the most talented people from a diverse candidate pool. We don't just accept differences - we celebrate them, we support them, and we thrive on them for the benefit of our employees, our platform and those we serve. Vida is committed to providing reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals with disabilities and disabled veterans in our job application procedures.,Hinge Health is pioneering the world's most patient-centered digital hospital, starting with musculoskeletal health. MSK conditions are the #1 medical spend for US employers. Hinge Health is finally making it easier to bring expert-recommended care to millions of patients by being the first company to combine wearable-sensor guided exercise therapy with 1-on-1 health coaching and patient education. Only Hinge Health has clinically validated outcomes across 4 peer-reviewed studies showing reductions in: chronic pain, opioid use, anxiety, depression, absenteeism, and costly surgeries.

4 in 5 employers with a digital MSK solution partner with Hinge Health and we are poised to triple our customer base again in 2020. Hinge Health has raised $126M to date and has 300+ employees across our San Francisco, Portland, Minneapolis, Chicago, and remote offices.

We are looking for an experienced analyst to partner with many of the most important decision makers at the company, helping us drive forward our understanding of user and company data. This person will dive headlong into complex problems alongside operators (including R&D, Clinical, Operations, and more) to answer tough questions using a wide variety of techniques, from exploratory analyses to experimentation.

This role takes important analytics competencies (natural curiosity, partnering with stakeholders) and mixes them with data science and applied statistics to provide signal from the noise. This analyst not only adds value by answering longstanding questions but figures out which questions to ask next. It’s a fantastic opportunity to join our fast-growing data team and shape how Hinge Health uses data to make its most critical decisions.
WHAT YOU’LL ACCOMPLISH
Mature the understanding of trends in our data, clarifying company and product strategy
Build strong partnerships across the organization, becoming a trusted partner
Co-lead on designing product experiments and lead on measuring their effectiveness
Enable others to self-serve for ongoing data needs through Mode
Work closely with our data engineers to continue maturing our data infrastructure
Helping your colleagues do the best, most well-informed work of their career
WHAT WE’RE LOOKING FOR
5+ years experience using statistical techniques to analyze data (R, Python, etc.)
Proven track record partnering with with any business unit, from Product to Commercial
Proficient with SQL and Python and can manage their own data pipelines when needed
Pairs an understanding of high-level business/product problems with advanced analysis
Mastery of dashboard tools (Mode, Tableau, Looker, etc.) and a knack for visuals
Thrives in ambiguity and can explore a problem with minimal direction
BONUS POINTS
Bachelors or advanced degree in Statistics, Mathematics, CS or other quantitative field
Experience analyzing healthcare-specific data: ICD-10/CPT/DRG codes, medical claims
Comfort working at a fast-paced start-up
WHAT SHAPES OUR COMPANY
Trust: We trust our teammates to always act in the team and company’s best interest.
Hustle: We’re creative, we’re unrelenting, we find a way.
Effective communication: We’re prompt and concise.
Learn-it-all (vs know-it-all): We’re always willing to learn.
Frugal: We don’t waste money and especially not time.
WHAT YOU'LL LOVE ABOUT US
Competitive compensation with meaningful stock options
Medical, Dental, Vision, Disability and Life Insurance (We cover 100% of your premium and 75% for your dependents)
401K match
3 months paid parental leave
Daily lunch
Professional development budget
Monthly fitness/gym reimbursement
Annual mental wellness benefit
Noise-cancelling headphones
Work from home policy
Opportunity to join a fantastically talented, diverse, and passionate team at a pivotal time in the company’s lifecycle
If you're interested - we'd love to hear from you. No recruiters, please.

Hinge Health is proud to be an Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, gender (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics.

We celebrate diversity and are committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees.,About Pill Club

Pill Club is reinventing the way women receive healthcare and essential medicine. Starting with birth control, we create a patient experience that is personal, convenient, affordable, and delightful. We offer everything she needs in one place - healthcare through telemedicine, payment using your credit card or your insurance, and prescriptions by mail.
Our mission is to be a trusted healthcare partner for women, empowering them through access, choice, and education – all while delivering a positive and personal experience. Launched in 2016, the Pill Club is a leader in the technology-enabled virtual care and pharmacy space, serving hundreds of thousands of patients across the US.

Description

As the Senior Analyst for the Operations team, you will closely partner with our COO and Head of Business Operations to expand our use of data to drive critical insights and strategic decisions. In addition, from Day One, you will have the opportunity to shape the way we use, manage, and derive value from data across the company.
Responsibilities
Partner with our Operations team to define key metrics while prioritizing the highest impact data analyses
Partner with our Data Engineering team to access and structure data
Learn our business so that you can proactively offer compelling analyses that make our operations stronger
Independently embrace ambiguous problems and return with clarity: define and break down problems, structure high ROI analyses, explain results to both technical and business audiences, offer clear recommendations
Leverage your experience in other organizations to help us grow an industry-leading Business Intelligence team
Collaborate cross-functionally with other Analysts at Pill Club to evolve shared platforms and technologies and share best practices
Clearly communicate wins and successes as well as risks and roadblocks
Inspire passion for our mission across the company
Qualifications
4-8 years of experience demonstrating professional growth in Analytics function
Track record of building collaboration and effective teamwork with technical and non-technical colleagues
Strong communication skills, with ability to present complicated and high impact analyses in a way that catalyses decision making and action
Excellent SQL and Excel skills
Experience working with data visualization tools like Tableau, Quicksight, or Looker
High integrity team player who is flexible and adaptable to meeting the evolving needs of a high-growth and fast paced organization
If you fit most of these requirements and love working to improve women’s health, please apply with a resume. We can’t wait to hear from you!

This is a full-time position. Our offices are in San Mateo, CA, but this role may be remote. Title and compensation will reflect level of experience and expected contribution.

We are an Equal Employment/Affirmative Action employer. We do not discriminate in hiring on the basis of sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, race, color, religious creed, national origin, physical or mental disability, protected Veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by federal, state, or local law.,Position Overview:

Job Summary:

The Enrollment and Student Services Data and Systems
Operations Analyst facilitates the use of student information systems for
interpreting institutional and industry trends, understanding long-range impacts
and evolving business processes in a timely manner to get results and outcomes.The Analyst defines pathways and systems for
how and where students interact at the University based on business
intelligence.As a dedicated resource to
the Division of Enrollment and Student Services, the person plays a key role in
strategic planning and vision relative to data & systems analytics to
improve operations, particularly related to student success and the mission of
the Division.

Duties and Responsibilities:

Application Support
Train and collaborate with end users to assure they have the appropriate
tools and skills to perform operational tasks.Analyze system configurations to affirm compliance with institutional policies
and procedures and industry best practices.

Data Management and Report
Writing Develop and maintain routine and special reports from student
information systems for university-wide distribution.Utilize business intelligence tools to
develop executive dashboards based on key performance indicators.Develop and implement systems that assure
accuracy and integrity of system data.Develop monitoring and remediation techniques to ensure data integrity.

Data Analysis - Verify
and interpret data to help identify findings and make recommendations.Analyze data and generate reports regarding
ongoing issues and trends that are used by the Division and other University
stakeholders to make decisions on performance improvement and new initiatives.

Interface
administration - Work with key stakeholders and technology staff throughout
the University, but particularly in IT Enterprise Systems and Institutional
Research, on implementing integration between the Universitys enterprise
systems and external data sources.Maintain integration routines and troubleshoot issues.

Process Management
and Design Work with key stakeholders and technology staff on
implementing new technologies and processes for systems that improve Division
operations and contribute to student success.Analyze and recommend process within the Division and in collaboration
with others throughout the University aimed at learning and improvement as the
University evolves and grows.

External and Internal
Environmental Analysis- regularly scans the external environment for data
analytic and technology trends in the fields of higher education, especially
health sciences education, and health care practice that effect the education
of health care professionals.Analyzes
and applies the information that is gained to the context of the
University.Makes recommendations and
collaborates with others in the University to develop responses to the results
of that analysis and application.

Supervisory
Responsibilities:

With the Executive Assistant, Enrollment and Student
Services, Supervises the E&SS Operations Assistants.With the Dean of Admission and the Director
of Financial Aid, supervises the work of those Departments systems analysts.

Qualifications:

Skills and Abilities
Demonstrated knowledge in relational database concepts
Ability to develop and analyze complex structured query language (SQL) programming
Experience working with enterprise information systems in a multi-departmental setting
Ability to apply complex problem-solving techniques
Knowledge of the systems development life cycle, structured analysis and design techniques, user requirement definition, interviewing and data collection techniques
Excellent communications skills working with people with varying levels of fluency with information technology and data analytics in order to achieve the desired outcomes
Education and Experience

Bachelors degree is required and a masters degree in an area related to the position requirements is preferred. Minimum 5 years IT experience required with at least 2 years in higher education, particularly using student information systems and data analytics.

The University has an institution-wide commitment to diversity, equity and inclusion. We strive to build a welcoming and supportive campus environment, and acknowledge that diversity is an educational imperative to achieve excellence.
Organization: Samuel Merritt University
Employee Status: Regular
Employee Referral Bonus: No
Benefits: Yes
Position Status: Exempt
Union: No
Job Shift: Day
Shift Hours: 8 Hour Shift
Days of the Week Scheduled: Monday-Friday
Weekend Requirements: None
Schedule: Full Time
Hrs Per 2wk Pay Period: 80,Marion County Public Health Department is an organization that celebrates diversity, and seeks to employ a diverse workforce. We actively encourage all individuals to apply for employment and to seek advancement opportunities. Marion County Public Health Department also provides reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with disabilities as required by law. For additional questions please contact us at: hrmail@hhcorp.org.

POSITION SUMMARY:

This position will play a leading role in helping understand the impact of Ending the HIV Epidemic (EhE) initiatives in Marion County and the Indianapolis Transitional Grant Area. This position will work with EhE initiatives to support data collection, entry, quality remediation, analysis, evaluation and reporting. The position will also provide support to the program evaluation team and the coordination of data management services with that team. This position will collaborate with the HIV Epidemiologist and the State Surveillance Program to review eHARS data to facilitate data to care. This position will work closely with the EhE Grant Manager to ensure EhE program meets reporting requirements of the Program and to use data to help improve outcomes. Position will assist with grant writing and reporting. This includes but is not limited to the creation and generation of CAREWare data and analysis and data from other sources as needed to support the EhE program.

This position works under the Ending the HIV Epidemic grant program and will be responsible for data-related infrastructure enhancements to improve client services and outcomes. This position will be funded through HRSA Ending the HIV Epidemic Grant, and continued employment is contingent upon receipt of the grant.

QUALIFICATIONS:
Completion of a Bachelor's Degree in Public Health, Allied Health or related discipline is required
Experience with computerized data analysis and data management
Knowledge of HIV/AIDS and/or STI related issues is beneficial
All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or veteran status.

Nearest Major Market: Indianapolis,Business Intelligence
Franciscan Alliance
1500 Albany Street
Beech Grove, IN 46107
Days
Full-Time
Bachelor's Preferred
WHAT WE NEED
Healthcare Data Analyst
WHO WE ARE LOOKING FOR
Executes a variety of complex analytical exercises to provide operations, Quality and medical management with actionable, high quality quantitative information that drives effective business decision making, enables interpretation of current, past and future performance, and identifies opportunities to improve patient quality of care. Analyzes the root cause of any identified opportunities and present the story to business decision makers to take appropriate actions using PPTs and dashboards.
WHAT YOU WILL DO
Conduct rigorous data mining and statistically sound analytical analyses to develop and report high quality actionable and quantitative information that will drive effective and integrated business decision making, enable interpretation of performance trends
Identify new opportunities to reduce unnecessary medical and administrative costs.
Create dynamic and highly effective methods of data delivery and provide critical and insightful data.
Coordinate with line and support functions to provide the analytical support to critical operational effectiveness initiatives and to identify new opportunities for improvement.
Develop expertise, thought leadership in the area of analytics, business intelligence and reporting, and provide new and innovative approaches to business data analysis and interpretation.
Develop and execute presentations, reports and dashboards for middle and senior management use. Continuously improve the delivery of process performance information to all business partners.
Utilizes SQL, SAS, Tableau, R, etc. languages and technologies for the purpose of extracting and processing data for the business’s analytical needs.
Works with Project Manager to ensure a review and tracking process exists throughout the project life-cycle.
Recommends process improvement opportunities.
Performs related duties, as required.
WHAT IT TAKES TO SUCCEED
ACO claims data – Knowledge of Accountable Care Organization (ACO) claims data
EPIC data models – Knowledge of Epic data modelling
Analytical Software Knowledge – Demonstrated knowledge of analytical software
SAS – Demonstrated knowledge and use of SAS analytics software
Databases & SQL – Demonstrated knowledge and use of databases and SQL
Tableau - Demonstrated knowledge and use of Tableau
EPIC (Clarity / Caboodle) Expertise

WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR

5-10 Years Experience; 5 Years Experience in this position specialty

License(s):

Certification(s):

Travel: Up to 20%

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER

It is the policy of Franciscan Alliance to provide equal employment to its employees and qualified applicants for employment as otherwise required by an applicable local, state or Federal law.

Franciscan Alliance reserves a Right of Conscience objection in the event local, state or Federal ordinances that violate its values and the free exercise of its religious rights.

Franciscan Alliance is committed to equal employment opportunity.

INFORMATION SERVICES,Strive Health

Role: Analyst, Data Strategy & Analytics

Location: Denver, CO

Contact: Jon Collins jon@strivehealth.com

Strive Overview:

Founded in 2018, Strive Health is creating a new standard of kidney care to cut inpatient utilization, increase the adoption of home dialysis, and significantly improve patient outcomes and experience. Strive Health is working to reinvent how chronic kidney disease patients are engaged and treated before they reach the need for dialysis.

Leveraging comparative and predictive data and analytics to identify patients at risk, Strive Healths interventions significantly reduce the rate of emergent dialysis crash with pre-ESRD care and education. Strive seeks to get CKD and ESRD patients the care they need, via a comprehensive clinical model utilizing clinician extenders to engage and treat patients along their care journey.

Based in Denver, CO, Strive Health is backed by New Enterprise Associates, Town Hall Ventures, Echo Health Ventures, and Ascension Ventures.

Analyst, Data Strategy & Analytics

The Analyst will work across the organization to support new and ongoing initiatives. This person will be an early member of a highly experienced and passionate team and will play a key role in defining the future of the organization. The associates primary focus will be supporting and advancing initiatives across analytics and operational performance in collaboration with both the new market & business development team, as well as the organization overall.

Responsibilities:

· Research, hypothesize and develop analytical approaches for identifying, analyzing, and interpreting trends or patterns in complex data sets, particularly in healthcare claims & lab data

· Ability to conceptualize and design innovative models to assess viability of new and ongoing initiatives and clinical programs

· Collaborate with team members from strategy, clinical and new market functions to identify data driven opportunities to add value to existing and potential partners

· Perform ad-hoc analysis for internal and external stakeholders

· Design and build self-service dashboards to measure performance and assist in directing teams efforts towards initiatives with the largest impact

· Identify, communicate and lead the resolution of data gaps that impede the fulfilment of operational reporting and oversight

Qualifications:

· Bachelors degree with strong academic achievement

· Located in Denver, or willing to relocate

· 2-3 years experience in healthcare data analysis

Working knowledge of analyzing medical claim, lab data, EMR data and clinical data

· High degree of proficiency in Microsoft SQL, Excel & PowerPoint

· Entrepreneurial spirit and comfort in ambiguity; desire to be a self-starter,Job Description
RxRevu is hiring a mid-level professional to excel in a multi-faceted data analyst role aligned with supporting business development and client support initiatives at a growing healthcare IT company. The successful candidate will assist in data validation, report generation, and analysis of healthcare, market intelligence, and web application data. The Data Analyst will work closely with colleagues on the analytics, client services, marketing, and sales teams to provide insights for the provider, payer, and EHR markets.

Responsibilities include:
Generating statistical reporting by obtaining data from disparate sources ensuring the applicability and accuracy of information
Building dashboards and reports for payer/provider clients and internal teams: client services, marketing, and sales, to provide insights for the strategic goals of each stakeholder
Review data to determine operational impacts and needed actions; elevate issues, trends, areas for improvement and opportunities for management to provide transparency for and increase client ROI
Supporting data access for revenue and growth models, as well as developing and implementing improvements in forecast methodology
Qualifications
2+ years of relevant data analysis work experience
Experience with programming in relevant statistical languages such as Python/R
Advanced knowledge of data visualization and dashboarding tools such as Tableau
Experience with data querying and languages such as SQL
Willingness to challenge the status quo and drive creative and unique solutions
Adept at translating vague ideas into clear, defined goals aligned with revenue growth and customer satisfaction, and an ability to drive the execution of those goals
Strong attention to details, with excellent written and verbal communication skills
Strong interpersonal skills and an ability to build and maintain productive, positive relationships with other members of the RxRevu team
A bachelor’s degree in statistics, information sciences, information technology or other applicable concentration. Other relevant experience will also be considered in lieu of a formal degree.
The following qualifications are desirable but not required:
Familiarity with healthcare payer/provider value chain, value-based care models, and healthcare provider-facing software solutions
Familiarity with cloud storage and computing services/platforms

Company Description
Our mission is to help doctors help patients receive better medications at a better price, right when they need it. RxRevu’s technology platform (SwiftRx®) fully integrates with electronic health records and uses real-time, patient-specific data to deliver patient-specific drug costs and lower-cost alternatives at the point of care.,Summary

The Data Analyst will be responsible for developing SQL databases, queries, procedures, views, functions and custom reports. This position will be developing contact center related enterprise data warehouse (CC-EDW). This CC-EDW will house data from multiple sources. Additionally, this position will utilize data blending and data modeling to produce cradle-to-grave reporting. Some examples of data sources are inbound calls, outbound calls, caller survey data, emails, chat sessions, automated dialer calls, etc. This position will have the benefit of creating a Data warehouse and its entire support process rather than maintaining and improving an existing process.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities
Responsible for the development and maintenance of Welldyne’s centralized contact center reporting process.
Interface with departmental leadership to gather reporting requirements.
Design and develop data warehouse platform, capabilities, data schemas, and models.
Develop SQL queries and SQL programmability to satisfy data and reporting requirements.
Design, build, and maintain ETL pipelines to support data and analytical needs.
Advanced level of SQL programming for data analysis is required.
Additional duties as assigned.

Education and Experience
Must have experience creating an EDW from inception.
Requirements gathering
Business matrix design
Schema documentation
Must have previous development experience working within a contact/call center environment.
5+ years of experience developing complex T-SQL procedures, query performance tunings, and SSIS packages.
5+ years of experience working with Microsoft SQL Server SSAS and SSRS.
5+ years of experience in data mining (i.e., SQL, ETL, complex data warehouse).
3+ years of experience with xml.
3+ years of experience with .net Framework.
5+ years of experience working with BI tools such as Tableau.
5+ years of experience developing data warehouses, operational data store, and/or data marts.
Six-Sigma Green Belt or higher is a highly preferred
Work Environment / Physical Demands

This position is in a typical office environment which requires prolonged sitting in front of a computer. Requires hand-eye coordination and manual dexterity sufficient to operate standard office equipment including operation of standard computer and phone equipment. May have occasional high stress when dealing with customers/clients. Some travel may be required.

EOE M/F/D/V,This senior individual contributor is primarily responsible for driving strategic data-informed decisions, gathering data and information on targeted variables in an established systematic fashion, and preparing data for analytic efforts. This position drives the execution of creative data analytic approaches leading to actionable outcomes across functional areas, business and/or clinical lines, interprets complex data analyses, and leads the development of advanced analytical and/or statistical models enabling informed business decisions.

Essential Responsibilities:
Identifies and evaluates emerging trends in health insurance and health care. Practices self-leadership and promotes learning in others by building relationships with cross-functional stakeholders; communicating information and providing advice to drive projects forward; influencing team members within assigned unit; listening and responding to, seeking, and addressing performance feedback; adapting to competing demands and new responsibilities; providing feedback to others, including upward feedback to leadership and mentoring junior team members; creating and executing plans to capitalize on strengths and develop weaknesses; and adapting to and learning from change, difficulties, and feedback.
Conducts or oversees business-specific projects by applying deep expertise in subject area; promoting adherence to all procedures and policies; developing work plans to meet business priorities and deadlines; determining and carrying out processes and methodologies; coordinating and delegating resources to accomplish organizational goals; partnering internally and externally to make effective business decisions; solving complex problems; escalating issues or risks as appropriate; monitoring progress and results; recognizing and capitalizing on improvement opportunities; and evaluating recommendations made by others.
Interprets complex data analyses by applying findings to contextual settings; and developing insights, reports, and presentations telling a compelling story to stakeholders to enable and influence decision making; participating in peer reviews; and providing context related to data interpretations and/or limitations as appropriate.
Leads the development of advanced analytical and/or statistical models enabling informed business decisions by determining data and analytical requirements; translating models and gaining stakeholder buy-in for implementation; creating complex models leading to actionable insights; and testing, refining, and validating models.
Drives the execution of creative data analytic approaches leading to actionable outcomes across functional areas, business and/or clinical lines by defining and calculating complex metrics to be analyzed; defining, calculating, and validating algorithms; and conducting complex analyses, including descriptive, correlational, inferential, and/or predictive statistics.
Prepares data for analytic efforts by integrating and consolidating data; ensuring data quality and accuracy; profiling data inaccuracies and recommending process improvements or system changes to enhance overall quality of the data; collaborating with stakeholders and source system owners to resolve data quality issues as appropriate; and cleaning and creating final data set(s) for analysis.
Gathers data and information on targeted variables in an established systematic fashion by validating data sources; querying, merging, and extracting data across internal and external sources; completing routine data refresh and update; developing and/or delivering complex tools for electronic data collection; and providing user training, support, and documentation.
Drives strategic data-informed decisions by consulting with clients and leadership to identify and clarify key business needs across functional areas, business and/or clinical lines; developing outcomes and process measures; translating business requirements; determining data/information needs and data collection methods; developing complex analysis plans; evaluating the impact of business decisions on clients, customers, and/or members; partnering with clients and staff to identify opportunities and methods to improve efficiencies with analysis; supporting and training end-users; and documenting processes and deliverables.

Basic Qualifications:
Experience
Minimum ten (10) years' experience in data analytics required.
Education
Master's degree in Mathematics, Statistics, Engineering, Social/Physical/Life Science, Business, or related field.
License, Certification, Registration
N/A

Additional Requirements:
N/A

Preferred Qualifications:
Six (6) years health insurance experience preferred.
EMC Data Science Associate (EMCDSA).
Certified Authorization Professional (CAP).
Oracle Business Intelligence (OBI).
Microsoft Certified Solutions Expert (MCSE).

Kaiser Permanente is an equal opportunity employer committed to a diverse and inclusive workforce. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), age, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, parental status, ancestry, disability, gender identity, veteran status, genetic information, other distinguishing characteristics of diversity and inclusion, or any other protected status.

External hires must pass a background check/drug screen. Qualified applicants with arrest and/or conviction records will be considered for employment in a manner consistent with federal and state laws, as well as applicable local ordinances, including but not limited to the San Francisco and Los Angeles Fair Chance Ordinances.,Senior Health Data Analyst (SAS)

Telligen is one of the most respected health management organizations in the country. We enjoy a friendly work environment where everyone is dedicated to mutual trust, respect, and excellence. Telligen employee-owners are committed to finding innovative solutions, which makes us the first choice for a broad range of clients. We make a difference, in the lives of people, in the world of healthcare.

As a 100% employee-owned company, our employee-owners drive our business, our solutions and share in our success. Telligen attracts a highly qualified and diverse workforce who display deep dedication, unwavering integrity and willingness to support the communities in which we serve. We approach our vision to be one of the most sought-after companies to transform the health of populations by following through on our values of Ownership, Community, Ingenuity & Integrity.

As a Senior Health Data Analyst at Telligen, you will lead the planning, designing and coordinating implementation of optimal analytical reporting methods for specified health care analysis activities and projects. You will be responsible for developing optimal methodologies for presenting the results of the analysis.

The Gig:

You will write or revise statistical software programs using SAS or other statistical software.
You will coordinate technical development, testing, and documentation of the data analysis solution of analytical reporting activities with technical team members and coordinators. May develop and update documents pertaining to system or software and implement relational database design.
You will lead the planning, designing, and coordinating of the analytical reporting methods for health care analysis activities and projects.
You will coordinate the design of analytical reporting methodologies with end users at all levels.
You will perform maintenance and backup functions for database.
You will research and develop optimal methods of presentation of results.
You will ensure information is presented in a professional and understandable manner.
You will stay abreast of statistical technology and reporting methods.
You will direct the evaluation of various software to determine the most appropriate to use in project analysis and makes recommendations to management for improvements.
Serves as a resource and technical expert to clients and less experienced staff.
What you need to make the cut:
Four year degree in mathematics or related field and/or equivalent training and/or experience; Masters degree preferred
3 - 5 years experience in data analysis or design of analytical reports
Demonstrated experience using SAS
Experience in health care analysis and technical writing preferred
Experience with claims data preferred
Why Telligen... for over 45 years Telligen has been dedicated to the delivery of innovative health management solutions which improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of healthcare for consumers and providers. Telligen serves commercial clients and government programs at the federal, state and local level, improving health for millions of people nationwide.

Competitive pay and benefits. We offer comprehensive benefits including medical, dental, vision, HSA & flex spending accounts, life insurance, disability, 401(k) and an ESOP (Employee Stock Ownership Plan).
100% Employee-Owned. We have a culture where Ownership matters!
Life/Work Balance. Generous holiday, volunteer and paid time-off benefits.
Casual Dress. Come in a sweatshirt, jeans, whateverlike everyone else here.
Free Fruit Friday. You know what they say about an Apple a Day!
Giving Garden. Have a green thumb? Over 3,000 pounds of produce donated annually.
Wellness Program. Healthy employee-owners are engaged employee-owners and we are committed to providing many opportunities to motivate you along your well-being journey through our RevUP! wellness program.
Education. Tuition and education assistance & career related CEU's, license and certifications.
Community. Our Telligen Community Initiative has awarded more than $4 million in grant awards since 2005.

Interested? Now that you know a little about us, wed like to learn more about you. Please include a current resume with your application. We also highly recommend including a cover letter where you can highlight why you think youd be a great fit within the team... we promise we will read it all the way through!

Thank you for your interest in Telligen!
Follow us on Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn to learn more about our mission-driven culture and stay up to speed.
www.telligen.com/careers

Telligen and our affiliates are Affirmative Action, Equal Opportunity Employers (EOE/M/F/Vet/Disability) and E-Verify Participants.

Telligen will not provide sponsorship for this position. If you will require sponsorship for work authorization now or in the future, we cannot consider your application at this time.

Telligen does not accept 3rd party solicitations from outside staffing firms.,You.

You bring your body, mind, heart and spirit to your work as a Senior Quality Data Analyst.

Youre equally comfortable with performing data analysis/reporting/validation as well as researching data integrity issues.

Youre great at what you do, but you want to be part of something even greater. Because you believe that while individuals can be strong, the right team is invincible.

Us.

System Services is our Corporate Headquarters in Broomfield, Colorado and is located within the Oracle campus. SCL Health is a faith-based, nonprofit healthcare organization dedicated to improving the well-being of the people we serve.

Benefits are one of the ways we encourage health for you and your family. Our generous package includes medical, dental and vision coverage. But health is more than a well-working body: it encompasses body, mind and social well-being. To that end, weve launched a Healthy Living program to address your holistic health. Healthy Living includes financial incentives, digital tools, tobacco cessation, classes, counseling and paid time off. We also offer financial wellness tools and retirement planning.

We.

Together well align mission and careers, values and workplace. Well encourage joy and take pride in our integrity.

Well laugh at each others jokes (even the bad ones). Well hello and high five. Well celebrate milestones and acknowledge the value of spirituality in healing.

Were proud of what we know, which includes how much there is to learn.

Your day.

As a Sr. Quality Data Analyst you need to know how to:
Create reports and scorecards/dashboards to track the progress of quality, safety and risk efforts as it relates to internal and external programs including, but not limited to, Operational Performance Goals (OPG), Integrated Quality Scorecard (IQS), CMS, The Joint Commission, Leapfrog, etc.
Able to conceptualize and create effective data extracts from multiple sources to complete complex analysis.
Validate data sources, appropriate mapping and identify variances.
Ability to identify and clearly articulate data points for inclusion in data tables for identified measures.
Responsible for managing scope and completion of work, meeting deadlines, and providing deliverables to the customers or end users.
Manage complex projects, schedules and facilitates meetings as necessary to complete assignments.
Develop and manage the process for identifying and communicating (e.g. via a report) open gaps.
Provide analytic support for internal/external reporting as requested.
Participate in Data Governance and Validation Activities as requested to assure data integrity.
Your experience.

We hire people, not resumes. But we also expect excellence, which is why we require:
Bachelor's degree required, or equivalent Informatics experience, required
Minimum of five (5) years of experience in data analytics, required
Minimum of three (3) years of experience in a healthcare setting, required
Highly prefer Epic experience / Clarity certification
Must have prior experience with Tableau
Background and experience in statistics and data management and automation
Your next move.

Now that you know more about being a Sr. Quality Data Analyst on our team we hope youll join us. At SCL Health youll reaffirm every day how much you love this work, and why you were called to it in the first place.

Located in Broomfield, CO.

Apply Today!