Requisition NumberRR-0001939
Remote:Yes
We collaborate. We create. We innovate.

Intrigued?

You’re a business professional with an innate curiosity that thrives in a dynamic and Agile environment. You appreciate teamwork, exemplify integrity, perseverance, flexibility, and a generosity of spirit… if this sounds like you, then please apply – we’d love to meet you!

Celerity is expanding and on the hunt for the savvy, creative, and analytically sound individuals that are motivated by solving complex problems. We’re in the business of transforming how people, process, and systems co-exist, while improving operational efficiencies and user-driven interactions. We work with groundbreaking companies, melding expertise in Digital Strategy, Technology, Creative, and Business Transformation.
The health and safety of our employees is our top priority. Due to the pandemic, all our employees are working remotely and we will be conducting candidate interviews by video. This position will continue to be remote once the COVID-19 crisis has abated.

What You’ll Do

• Perform data visualization and comparisons across multiple data sources / systems of record to provide value-added insights to support critical business operations teams
• Build scripts to perform low-level analysis and data investigation working in conjunction with other Celerity or client team members to improve data accuracy and make more informed decisions
• Support movement of large amounts of data and existing processes into new ecosystems including looking for opportunities for greater automation of existing processes via SQL
• Produce customized reports and visualizations as well as other ad-hoc analysis in support of time-sensitive business requests
• Demonstrate flexibility to expand beyond a pure data analysis role including upstream requirements gathering or downstream process recommendations/implementations centered around a strong understanding of client data

About You

• Bachelor’s Degree in Business, Management, or a quantitative field 3+ years SQL development of complex queries
• 2+ years professional experience
• Expertise designing and implementing ETL processes You have Teradata SQL Experience (preferred)
• Experience with Data Visualization such as Tableau or PowerBI
• You understand and have experience with multidimensional analysis and queries
• Strong communication skills
• You have an analytical mindset to be able to ask probing questions to eradicate ambiguity and are willing to point out flaws in logic and identify better ways to do things
• You have “Good Data Intuition”
• You are not an order taker, but an analyst that can sniff out trends, identify patterns, and answer open ended questions
• Willingness to expand scope of work beyond data to include business analyst, process analyst, or project manager type activities as necessary
We Are Celerity

Millions of people every day use websites, applications, and business processes designed and built by Celerity. As a consultancy of technologists, creatives, and business experts, we provide the action plans, teams, and solutions our clients need to transform the way they do business and deepen engagement with their customers.

Celerity empowers autonomy and accountability. We understand life happens and want our team to do what is needed to get the work done, enjoy it along the way, and have plenty of time and energy for family and friends, vacations, hobbies, learning of languages, you name it! At Celerity, our focus is on bringing synergies to business process, technology, and creative chops to deliver inspirational solutions. We love giving kudos and celebrating achievements. We provide an inclusive and flexible environment that fosters collaboration, quick pivots, and quality work.

Originally founded in 2002, Celerity was acquired in 2015 by AUSY, a France-based IT consultancy and engineering services firm. With 8 regional offices and 400+ employees, Celerity’s clients span a variety of industries including media and entertainment, healthcare, financial services, manufacturing, non-profit, and hospitality.

You can also get to know us better on Instagram, Facebook, Dribbble, LinkedIn, and Twitter.

Build Your Career

At Celerity, our professional growth plan focuses on individualizing everyone’s track through incorporating personal interests with training and mentorship, while further expanding existing strong suits. We recognize in this ever-evolving digital world, there is extreme value in learning new skills and technologies. Celerity provides opportunities to shape skill sets, work with an amazing team of industry-leading consultants and exciting clients, in addition to professional trainings and certifications that best align with your career goals.
We are proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer. All employment decisions shall be made without regard to age, race, creed, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability status, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, citizenship status or any other basis as protected by federal, state, or local law.
Celerity is committed to providing veteran employment opportunities to our service men and women.,The Role:

Roku is looking for a Senior Analyst in Advertising Inventory Analytics to play an instrumental role in helping Roku understand its users in the advertising ecoystesm. This role is critical to helping Roku understand its users through A/B testing, deep dive analyses, forecasting, and predictive analytics. Additionally, the successful analyst will be able to tell a compelling data story that reads beyond the numbers and provides strategic insights.

Responsibilities:
Analyze and collaborate cross-functionally to measure reach across the Roku advertising ecosystem
Work with inventory team to improve supply utilization, optimize supply-side distribution and improve effectiveness of inventory sourcing.
Work with analytics leads and cross-functional teams to champion a hypothesis-driven culture that rapidly tests, measures and iterates.
Develop reports and provide insights to help Publisher Ad Solutions team be effective and nimble. Create output that tells the story behind the data to non-technical team members.
Actively make recommendations to the inventory team on tactical and strategic initiatives
Play a crucial role in developing, maintaining, and socializing clear metric definitions
Act as a strategic partner with the Publisher Ad Solutions team to set and deliver on actionable goals and provide strategic guidance on data-driven decisions
Identifying new levers to help move key metrics
Technical Experience/Qualifications:
5+ years relevant experience in advertising/yield analytics supporting a revenue operations organization
Deep understanding of advertising ecosystem (i.e. DSPs, SSPs, etc.)
Expert in A|B test design
Experience working within and structuring very large data warehouses (i.e., 'Big Data)
Knowledge of statistical distributions and predictive modeling techniques
Expert abilities in SQL
Experience coding in R or Python
Experience creating data visualizations in Tableau, Looker, or other modern visualization tools
Proven track record of defining and executing key analyses with minimal supervision
Educational background in math, physics, economics, or computer science
#LI-SS1,Summary Data Analysis, Financial Products basics, Hands on SQL, some Big Data exposure, Messaging formats- hands on data, iterface work, worked with large systems- SQL- working with data Candidate has the opportunity to be a contributor to the Citi Markets Data Strategy and contribute towards the goal of increasing revenue by providing key analyticsMISmetrics for decision making, whilst also improving regulatory quality and accuracy. The candidate will work directly with bright and innovative individuals on both the business and technology side, giving broad exposure to front-to-back trade processing and electronic trading across all asset classes. By being part of the broader Olympus strategy, the candidate can also gain exposure to Big Data ecosystems, Google Cloud Architecture Data Science on one of the largest Data Repositories across the street. Key Responsibilities bull Develop Subject Matter Expertise on the key data elements that are consumed for reporting data to external and internal clients bull Ensure adherence to and develop best practices supporting Citirsquos Project Management Standards bull Ensure the business reporting needs are met with the most elegant and timely technology solutions bull Ensuring proper development life cycle is followed with artefacts to support Internal Audit and any inquiries bull Gather business requirements, perform detailed analysis, and produce associated functional specifications across multiple functions. bull Go-live support, investigation of issues. bull Participation in large-scale ldquohighly-visiblerdquo SITUAT testing cycles managing technology and business stakeholders bull Partner with business technology leads globally to deliver an E2E solution. bull Partner with business, technology and quant stakeholders to suggest innovative solutions to existing issues bull Produce implementation approach, timelines, go-live strategy. bull Project management oversight of the deliverables resources distributed across many different technology teams across the front to back application stack. bull Provide regular updates to senior management in technology, middle office front office bull Training of relevant teams prior to go-live of new business processesproducts, functionality or applications bull Work as lead business analystproject manager in the Olympus team supporting reporting for external and internal clients bull Work with Data Governance and Quality teams to understand data issues bull Work with technology leads across various teams to accomplish the reporting objective bull Work with various technology leads to ensure the gaps in the data completeness or accuracy are converted into prioritized Book of Work items Skills Qualifications bull 10+ years of business data analysis experience in large technology ecosystems bull Significant Business Analysis experience across the full project lifecycle (requirements, design, development, testing and deployment). bull Experience with Global Markets, Private Bank, Payments or Securities Services Product Knowledge preferred. Other general Financial Services experience should be coupled with other qualifications in this list. bull Any understanding of regulatory constraints and experience in delivering regulatory projects is extremely desirable (MiFID II, SFTR, SDRE (EMIR, CFTC, Volcker, etc.) but not mandatory bull Front, Middle and Back Office exposure, if any, will be required bull Exceptional skills on Microsoft Office ndash Excel, Word, Project, Visio, PowerPoint. bull Should be highly analytical and be able to individually to produce needed insights from the data. bull Strong SQL with experience working with RDBMS such as Oracle, Sybase, Netezza expected bull Experience working with teams supporting Business Intelligence platforms such as Tableau, QlikView, Microstrategy, will be a plus bull A history of delivering against agreed objectives bull Any applications development experience will be helpful. If not as a developer, experience bull Ability to leverage strong interpersonal collaboration skills in a fast-paced team environment bull Ability to multi-task and work under pressure bull Ability to pick up new concepts and apply the knowledge. bull Comfortable in presenting suggestions for change and or improving work flow bull Demonstrated leadership skills at the selected level bull Enthusiastic and proactive approach with willingness to learn bull Excellent analytical and process-based skills, i.e. process flow diagrams, business modelling, and functional design bull Excellent communication skills (there is a requirement to be Business facing) bull Excellent organizational and multi-tasking skills with tremendous attention to detail bull Familiarity or the ability to quickly understand and formulate application level requirements pertaining to complex workflows, or integration with external applications bull Problem-solving and facilitation skills bull Proficient at writing and delivering business requirement documents and presentations bull Proven delivery record of multiple projects involving process change and technology enhancements. bull Proven interpersonal skills with ability to partner and influence across organizational lines bull Self-motivation and prioritization of tasks and actions to hit deadlines according to business priorities bull The candidate is expected to be dynamic, flexible with a high energy level as this is a demanding and rapidly changing environment bull Thoroughness and organization is expected, as well as sound judgment. Thanks Regards, Deepti Negi Email Deepti.NegiXoriant.Com mailtoDeepti.NegiXoriant.Com Cell 732 640 8181 Xoriant Corporation www.xoriant.com httpwww.xoriant.com 343 Thornall Street Suite 720, Edison, NJ 08837 Disclaimer You are receiving this information as we believe it will be useful for you. If you do not want to receive such information from us in the future, you can click Unsubscribe Opt - Out mailtoUnsubscribe-eStaffXoriant.Com?subjectUnsubscribe Learn more about our privacy policy here httpswww.xoriant.comprivacy-policy httpswww.xoriant.comprivacy-policy,OverviewAt Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Perficient currently has a career opportunity for a Data Analyst - Data Aquisition / Lineage Consultatnt in our NYC office.Responsibilities* Collects requirements* Obtains the data fields for lineage* Obtains read access for the team ( including location of source code , what coding language etc)* Data Catalging/Data ProfilingQualifications* 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required.* Data cataloging/data profiling experience.* SQL Server, DB2, Oracle* Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer* Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions.* Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks.* Able to prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings; transformation rules documentation.Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,OverviewAt Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Perficient currently has a career opportunity for a Data Analyst - Data Scanning utilizing Rochade in our NYC office.Job Overview:The role of the Business Consultant is for individuals passionate about identifying and delivering the right Business solution for each client. Our Business Consultants have a keen Business orientation with an understanding of how technology can be effectively applied to meet a variety of Business needs.Our Business Consultants fill a number of different roles on our project teams working with a variety of technologies for a wide range of clients. The specific responsibilities vary for each client and each project. Key to the success of our Business Consultants is the willingness and desire to quickly learn the client's industry and the unique requirements of each engagement and to fill whatever role may be required to best support our client's needs.A Business Consultant thrives in challenging environments and accomplishes difficult assignments without significant supervision and instruction. Our Consultants can handle the stress of being accountable for delivery and: complete goals on time, practice strong attention to detail, persevere through tough obstacles, and do not get easily discouraged.The Senior Business Consultant will be involved in the strategic planning of an engagement or helping the client make decisions about their future IT direction. Once a project has begun, the Senior Business Consultant will facilitate key requirements with stakeholders and customers using standard and User Experience techniques. The Senior Business Consultant may be responsible for functional designs, detailed designs and system mapping, wireframes, requirement specifications, and prototypes.The Senior Business Consultant works with the Lead Business Consultant and Senior Project Managers to assist with daily operations exercising time management, communication and collaboration in a fast-paced environment to ensure the successful delivery of projects. The Senior Business Consultant will interface with Perficient technical and business delivery personnel, as well as vendors and customers on a regular basis. May mentor junior Consultants.ResponsibilitiesData Scanning team* They connect to the client server and pull the data via Becubic or Rochade and fetch the metadata and then send to stitching for lineage.* Rochade auto creates the lineage* If Becubic, then have to create lineage manually in stitching* Data cataloging/data profiling* SQL Server, DB2, Oracle* Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layerSkills needed for DB Analyst specific:Data ScanningData Profiling"QualificationsData Scanning Team - Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architect/modeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings; transformation rules documentation. 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required.Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,OverviewAt Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Perficient currently has a career opportunity for a Senior Business Consultant in our NYC office.Job Overview:The role of the Business Consultant is for individuals passionate about identifying and delivering the right Business solution for each client. Our Business Consultants have a keen Business orientation with an understanding of how technology can be effectively applied to meet a variety of Business needs.Our Business Consultants fill a number of different roles on our project teams working with a variety of technologies for a wide range of clients. The specific responsibilities vary for each client and each project. Key to the success of our Business Consultants is the willingness and desire to quickly learn the client's industry and the unique requirements of each engagement and to fill whatever role may be required to best support our client's needs.A Business Consultant thrives in challenging environments and accomplishes difficult assignments without significant supervision and instruction. Our Consultants can handle the stress of being accountable for delivery and: complete goals on time, practice strong attention to detail, persevere through tough obstacles, and do not get easily discouraged.The Senior Business Consultant will be involved in the strategic planning of an engagement or helping the client make decisions about their future IT direction. Once a project has begun, the Senior Business Consultant will facilitate key requirements with stakeholders and customers using standard and User Experience techniques. The Senior Business Consultant may be responsible for functional designs, detailed designs and system mapping, wireframes, requirement specifications, and prototypes.The Senior Business Consultant works with the Lead Business Consultant and Senior Project Managers to assist with daily operations exercising time management, communication and collaboration in a fast-paced environment to ensure the successful delivery of projects. The Senior Business Consultant will interface with Perficient technical and business delivery personnel, as well as vendors and customers on a regular basis. May mentor junior Consultants.ResponsibilitiesPerson will be a part of Data Stitching Team :Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of applications to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas. May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications. Works closely with client management to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. Researches and evaluates alternative solutions and makes recommendations.Top three skills: Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC Build stitching linage inside data catalog tool• Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer• ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISG/Watson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools)Skills Needed for Application Analyst:ASG Rochade, BecubicData LineageData Stitching"QualificationsPerson will be a part of Data Stitching Team : Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of applications to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas. May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications. Works closely with client management to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. Researches and evaluates alternative solutions and makes recommendations. Top three skills: Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC Build stitching linage inside data catalog tool • Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer • ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISG/Watson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools) Skills Needed for Application Analyst: ASG Rochade, Becubic Data Lineage Data Stitching"Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,Data Analyst Contract New York City Job 440 Provides strategic and tactical support to the organization by analyzing and interpreting the data to provide creative solutions. Provides strategic and tactical support to the organization by analyzing and interpreting the Task Deliverables Review desktop software used in environment in preparation for Windows 10 migrations by working closely with team that pulls data from Microsoft SCCM and runs the needed SQL queries Scrub software inventory to remove non-software such as patches, etc. Research unknowns using Internet Browsers, internal tools and better judgment to validate if true software or if it can be excluded Research to determine what software are Microsoft Office plugins Compare each software product to internal database to determine Windows 10 certification status Latest available software package number If software package requires unique license key for activation post installation Use pre-determined software categories to classify each line item of software Review scrubbed data to ensure updates are being reflected for each Business Units set of software ndash Repair or create Microsoft Excel formulas as needed Once software is properly scrubbed, reviewed and classified we should be able to identify which software has already been internally Windows 10 certified, not yet certifiedpackaged, unknown software, for each Business Unit Provide daily updates to team on analysis Skills Required Expert with Microsoft Excel Familiar with SQL Queries Familiar with desktop software Software Asset Management (SAM) experience is a plus Excellent attention to detail Well organized,Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area.

Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why” and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people's lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,This is for Citi.

BA/Data Analyst

- Must Have 5+ years in Tech, preferably in Financial Service

- Data and Business Analysis, Analyzing, evaluating, and synthesizing complex and large datasets from various sources.

- Trade lifecycle knowledge a big plus

- Experience with any regulatory projects across Capital Markets will be a plus

- Experience working with internal tech team and being able to quickly present the analysis and conclusions needed

- Experience with Oracle/other DBMS with strong SQL knowledge needed.

- Strong understanding of various data lookups and data mapping techniques

- Business presentation skills in PowerPoint, MindMapping tools will be additionally helpful,About Tachyon Technologies:

Tachyon TechnologiesÂis a Digital Transformation consulting firm that partners with businesses to implement customer-focused business transformation. Aligned with SAP's digital core, Tachyon Technologies collaborates with its clients to transform their business by leveraging existing IT investments and leading-edge digital solutions to positively impact their customers' experience. From initiation through realization, Tachyon Technologies understands what it takes for a consulting partner to be effective and strives to deliver a meaningful solution that exceeds its clients' expectations.

Â

Role: Data Analyst

Location: NYC, NY

Duration: Longterm

Description

Â
Expertise on SQL (Snowflake or any other MPP databases such as Redshift)<b> 2. Very good knowledge in data visualization tools such as Tableau and Looker( development and maintenance of LookerML).
Good experience on working with business stake holders such as Marking, Sales and Finance to understand the requirements and delivering the projects upon their sign-off
Working experience on Media subscriptions domain is highly preferred.
Basic understanding of Python programming will be added advantage(To work with Data Eng Team on roll-up Tables)
Â

Tachyon'sÂfull-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities, and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makesÂTachyonÂa great place to work.

Disclaimer:ÂThe above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.

Â

Â,Job Title Data Analyst Job Type Contract Location NY-New York SKILLS AND EXPERICENCE REQUIRED Data Scanning Team - Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architectmodeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings transformation rules documentation. 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required. Data catalogingdata profiling SQL Server, DB2, Oracle Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer Skills needed for DB Analyst specific Data Scanning Data Profiling" Educational Qualifications Required - Bachelorrsquos degree in Computer Science, Information Technology, Computer Engineering or closely related or equivalent Preferred - Masterrsquos degree in Management Information Systems (MIS), Computer Science, Big Data or Analytics or equivalent Equal Employment Opportunity Reliable employment does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, age or any other basis as covered by federal, state, or local law. Employment decisions are based solely on qualifications, merit and business needs. Thanks Regards, Palle Akhila IT RECRUITER (O) 248-278-4233 Akhila.prsrit.com,The hiring company is one of the world's largest construction and real estate conglomerate. Currently, they are looking for a Data Analyst intern to join the IT department in in headquarter office. The nature of the position is to assist with ERP implementation and support the IT department with financial data analysis.This position is a paid full-time internship and reports to IT Director.

Start Date: ASAP

Compensation: Paid (negotiable)

Responsibilities
Assist with ERP implementation and other IT project execution
Assist with business requirements gathering and coast analysis
Coordinate with internal business departments and consultants
Support daily OA system operation
Help with vendor contract management, order confirmation, and payment application
Perform other duties as assigned
Qualifications
Bachelor's degree or Advanced degree in Computer Science, Information System, Financial Analysis, or other related fields
A combination of IT & Finance background preferred
Strong communication skills
Basic knowledge of ERP system
Willing to learn and willing to take challenges
Detail-oriented
Powered by JazzHR,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

o6p2mepzHx,*Introduction**As an IBM Application Architect, you directly help clients transform their business and solve complex problems. You will define the scope and vision for projects that deliver customized solutions using your knowledge of IBM platforms. You are a technical leader, serving as a liaison among business partners, technical resources, and project stakeholders.**Your Role and Responsibilities**IBM Services is seeking Microsoft Dynamics Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Data Analysts to collect and analyze requirements and solve client problems using Microsoft Dynamics CRM solutions. You will serve as a liaison between clients and project consultants, particularly during initial project phases. You will work primarily on project execution but may be involved in sales support as well.Microsoft CRM Data Analysts are responsible for identifying, developing and deploying end-user solutions in CRM systems. Using your deep functional knowledge and familiarity with the Microsoft Dynamics CRM application, you will ensure that client business requirements are met while providing a variety of advisory services around project management, business process development, implementation support and end-user training.**Primary Responsibilities:****Project Execution**+ Support the translation of client business requirements into CRM solutions, including requirements approval, communication, traceability and reuse+ Contribute to the transfer of functional requirements to development and test teams+ Use CRM workflow technology to automate business processes+ Stay abreast on updates and new releases in CRM technologies (Microsoft's and its competitors)+ Educate end-users on CRM functions+ Provide end user classroom training on the configured CRM application before go-live and individual training during hyper-support after the cut-over **Sales Support**•Help determine and translate customer needs into a solution and approach•Contribute to proposal development•Contribute to scope, approach, and estimating input to the proposal team•Contribute to and participate in client demonstrations and presentations**Additional skills required:**+ Microsoft Office Suite, specifically Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Visio+ Microsoft DevOps+ Familiarity with Microsoft technologies/trends+ Strong analytical, presentation, and writing skillsSkills and experience in creating and delivering production demonstrations is preferred but not required.NOTE: Microsoft Dynamics CRM experience is required for this position**Required Technical and Professional Expertise**+ At least 3 years team lead experience or management experience of 5+ team members (management consultant only)+ At least 2 years project experience in enterprise business application development and delivery (e.g., CRM, ERP, SCM, HCM)+ At least 1 year project implementation experience using Microsoft Dynamics 365, Microsoft Dynamics CRM online, or Microsoft Dynamics CRM 2016, 2015, or 2013+ At least 2 years project experience translating client business needs into software capabilities+ At least 2 years project experience with business requirements analysis and modeling+ At least 2 years project experience creating functional designs, test conditions and test scripts+ At least 2 years experience working within a team environment+ Basic knowledge of software development methodologies (Waterfall and/or Agile)**Preferred Technical and Professional Expertise**+ At least 2 years consulting experience working for a global systems integrator+ Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP)+ At least 1 year project experience working with global and offshore project teams+ At least 1 year experience with system integration or user acceptance testing+ At least 1 year experience with organizational design+ At least 1 year experience with business process design or re-engineering+ At least 1 year experience with developing and implementing end-user training programs+ At least 1 year experience implementing or using CRM systems to support customer service, call center, or field service operations**About Business Unit**IBM Services is a team of business, strategy and technology consultants that design, build, and run foundational systems and services that is the backbone of the world's economy. IBM Services partners with the world's leading companies in over 170 countries to build smarter businesses by reimagining and reinventing through technology, with its outcome-focused methodologies, industry-leading portfolio and world class research and operations expertise leading to results-driven innovation and enduring excellence.**Your Life @ IBM**What matters to you when you're looking for your next career challenge?Maybe you want to get involved in work that really changes the world? What about somewhere with incredible and diverse career and development opportunities - where you can truly discover your passion? Are you looking for a culture of openness, collaboration and trust - where everyone has a voice? What about all of these? If so, then IBM could be your next career challenge. Join us, not to do something better, but to attempt things you never thought possible.Impact. Inclusion. Infinite Experiences. Do your best work ever.**About IBM**IBM's greatest invention is the IBMer. We believe that progress is made through progressive thinking, progressive leadership, progressive policy and progressive action. IBMers believe that the application of intelligence, reason and science can improve business, society and the human condition. Restlessly reinventing since 1911, we are the largest technology and consulting employer in the world, with more than 380,000 IBMers serving clients in 170 countries.**Location Statement**For additional information about location requirements, please discuss with the recruiter following submission of your application.**Being You @ IBM**IBM is committed to creating a diverse environment and is proud to be an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, national origin, genetics, disability, age, or veteran status. IBM is also committed to compliance with all fair employment practices regarding citizenship and immigration status.,Hi, Trust Yoursquore Doing Good. Enclosed is the job description for your perusal. If you are interested, kindly send me your updated resume along with the expected rate ASAP. Role Data Analyst with Rochade Location NYC, NY Duration Long Term Responsibilities Top three skills Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC Build stitching linage inside data catalog tool Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISGWatson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools) Skills Needed for Application Analyst ASG Rochade, Becubic Data Lineage Data Stitching" Thank You Sai Kiran Sr. Technical Recruiter (D) 248-504-6876 (M) (614) 721-6940 Emailsaikiran.chrsrit.com 22260 Haggerty Rd, Suite 285,Northville, MI 48167. www.rsrit.com httpwww.rsrit.com,DRG, part of Clarivate Analytics, provides syndicated research and strategic advisory services focused on digital health and marketing trends among consumers and healthcare professionals in 22 countries around the globe. Clients include top pharmaceutical companies, marketing agencies, health and medical publishers and technology providers. With us, you could make a large impact on our business unit results with backing from the leading player in the medical data industry.

We are hiring a highly skilled Market Research Data Analyst to support our multichannel engagement insights group. We understand how doctors, patients, and formulary decision-makers are using technology to inform their thinking and provide those insights to pharmaceutical marketing stakeholders (e.g., brand marketing teams, global marketing teams, digital content managers). The successful candidate will be expected to support multiple primary market research (PMR) analysis projects, effectively manage time commitments, and eventually assume greater responsibilities for projects. This role will have interactions with client teams, opportunity for advancement, and the ability to influence marketing and strategic planning decisions with global healthcare and pharmaceutical organizations.

Responsibilities:
Design, execute, and analyze survey data across multiple country markets/data sets to derive insights and prepare tables and PowerPoint reports that are relevant to pharmaceutical brand marketers
Secondary research to assess pharmaceutical and healthcare market landscapes, conduct competitive analyses
Manage and execute client consulting engagements, custom projects and client inquiries
Create and deliver compelling, insightful deliverables for clients based on the company’s suite of syndicated data sets
Support analyst team covering healthcare professional insights, including trends in physician or consumer technology adoption, telehealth, commercial innovation for pharma companies and the role of technology in patient care
Deliver client presentations
Keep up to date on technology industry trends most important to our understanding of healthcare trends in the U.S., especially as it relates to the pharmaceutical industry (U.S. and Global) and allied healthcare professionals.
Requirements
3-5 years industry experience in a related position, such as market research, agency, consulting or pharma
Bachelor’s degree required, advanced degree, such as an MBA, MA, or another relevant field is preferred
Exceptional PowerPoint skills
Experience with survey data collection is required (e.g., questionnaire design, survey fielding)
Experience with qualitative research, social or web analytics is a plus
Comfortable working with large data sets; Competency with basic data analysis (Wincross, SPSS, SQL) preferred
Understanding of healthcare trends in the U.S. especially as it relates to the pharmaceutical industry
A passion for understanding complex business questions
Benefits

At DRG, we know that better understanding of data leads to better application of data, which is why our experts partner with our clients to transform varied bodies of data into the evidence required to make well-informed business decisions.

Decision Resources Group is proudly committed to equal employment opportunities regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, marital status, disability, gender identity or Veteran status.

#LI-MD1,Job Description
Primary Responsibilities: Experience in a data analyst role. Preferably experience in the digital advertising industry or related field Ability to operate comfortably and effectively in a fast-paced, highly cross-functional, rapidly changing environment. Programming skills in SQL required; Python, or Java/Scala preferred Recent proven experience developing data visualizations, dashboards, and reporting in Tableau(or a similar reporting tool) Comfortable with any of advanced analytics tools such as Pandas, R, and Spark Ability to work effectively with data science and engineering partners to meet the data needs of the business, translating business needs into analytical requirements Experience engaging with the business and leadership on problem definition Ability to communicate the results of analyses in a clear and effective manner with product and leadership teams to influence the overall strategy of the product. Email: shashikanth@precisiontechcorp.com Phone:732-537-8954 Thanks & Regards Shashikanth,Data AnalystRochade Location NYC,NY Responsibilities Person will be a part of Data Stitching Team Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of applications to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas. May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications. Works closely with client management to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. Researches and evaluates alternative solutions and makes recommendations. Top three skills Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC Build stitching linage inside data catalog tool bull Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer bull ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISGWatson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools) Skills Needed for Application Analyst ASG Rochade, Becubic Data Lineage Data Stitching",Job Title Data Analyst (must have Data Scanning BeCubic Rochade) Location US-NY-New York Duration 12 Months Qualifications Data Scanning Team - Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architectmodeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings transformation rules documentation. 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required. Data catalogingdata profiling and BeCubic Rochade bull SQL Server, DB2, Oracle bull Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer,Hi,

Â

Hope you are doing well!!

Â

Enclosed is the job description for your perusal. If you are interested please send me your updated resume and your expected rate for this position ASAP.

Â

Job Title:ÂBusiness Analyst / Data Analyst

Location:ÂWeehawken, NJ

Duration: 12+ÂMonths

Position type: C2C & W2

Start Date:ÂImmediate

Â

Job Description:

Â

Good data analysis/SQL, good requirements gathering and documenting, good communication skills, good soft skills like managing conflicting situations and negotiating, able to deliver on time

Â

Best Regards

Â

Shaik Hefaz

Technical RecruiterÂ

Softcom Systems, Inc.

Email:

Hangouts:

Skype: hefazsk

475, Wall Street,ÂPrinceton, NJ-08540,ÂFax: 609-751-9077

Â

Under Bill s.1618 Title III passed by the 105th U.S. Congress thisÂmail cannot be considered as "spam" as long as we include contactÂinformation and a remove link for removal from our mailing list. InÂorder to not be in the recipients-list for this mail, please revert toÂus with "REMOVE" either in the subject or in the mail body.,Below JD:
Job Title: Healthcare Data/Reporting Analyst
Job Location: New York, NY 10010
Job Type: Full Time / Permanent

Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people's lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,OverviewPerficient currently has a career opportunity for a Senior Data Analyst with Data Scanning and Data Profiling experience in our NYC office. Must live in NJ or NY or be willing to relocate once cities open. Remote for now.At Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Responsibilities* Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs* Creates the system specifications.* Responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions.* Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes.* May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support).* Work in conjunction with the data architect/modeler on the data warehouse reporting solution.* Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks.* Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings; transformation rules documentationQualifications* Experience and knowledge in BeCubic or ASG-DI / Rochade required.* 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required.* Must have Data Scanning, Data Profiling, Data Cataloging experience.* SQL Server, DB2, Oracle.* Must have knowledge of lineage and financial services industry, technical metadata layer.Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.#LI-JS1,Title: GIS Data analyst
Location: New York, NY
Duration: 6 months

Position Summary:
The data analyst is responsible for ensuring that all aspects of data (including spatial) are effectively stored, manipulated, created, and designed to drive decision-making and clarification throughout the agency.
Reporting to the Director, Research and Analysis, s/he is accountable for data and users ensuring that the data deliverables and analyses are accurate and timely.
S/he will also provide central coordination for the management of geospatial analyses and geodatabases.
S/he will also ensure that methodologies and policies are consistent across all aspects of the organization.

Duties and Responsibilities:
Support programs and the overall organization in addressing various ad hoc policy and ongoing data questions:
Data Quality Assurance
Methodology development and documentation
Reporting functions for federal and state requirements
Providing policy frameworks and quantitative scenario analysis
Develop longer term strategies and research projects to assess and/or highlight programmatic and organizational performance.
Work with a team of GIS, data, and research analysts in the development and maintenance of performance management reports and ad hoc data analysis to support program operations.
Coordinate with other teams in HCR in preparing data to for external and internal reporting and research needs.
Consult with program to define project needs, purpose, and data requirements.
Use GIS applications and equipment to improve project efficiency.
Requirements:
Must be a NY State resident or able to relocate to NYS
Master's degree with course work or experience in GIS, planning, computer science, geography, or related fields of study.
Excellent oral, written, and quantitative skills.
Exceptional problem-solving abilities.
Ability to quickly and clearly synthesize information.
Exceptional ability to use data to make decisions.
Expertise in the use of Microsoft Office products, specifically Excel and Access.
Expertise in the use of geospatial tools such as ArcGIS.
Experience with a statistical package such as STATA, SAS, or R.
Ability to work in a flexible, fast paced, mission driven environment.

About our Company:
Connecting people’s aptitude & ambitions with our opportunities to deliver results.
22nd Century Technologies was established in 1997 and is headquartered in McLean VA. We are one of the leading IT services and solutions firm in the country with 12 regional offices and presence in all 50 states. We bring a mix of innovative technology and sector expertise to customers in defense, intelligence, civil, and healthcare markets. As our name implies, we are a forward thinking company with the ultimate goal of helping our customers implement innovative IT solutions that will satisfy their business needs. We combine real-world experience, specialized skills, innovative thinking, and industry knowledge to deliver quality IT solutions. At our core, we are about people - our customers and our employees.
“22nd Century Technologies is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Sr Business Data Analyst 12+months Jersey City, NJ Remote Initially cause of covid later on Onsite Job description bull Financial Data Modeling Data Mining Knowledge bull Reverse engineering functional specifications from data bull Independently query data from multiple relational databases for analysis bull Work closely with IT and Operations partners bull Work with client Security Coding and leverage external vendors and standards organizations bull Work Independently to complete a task Required Skills bull Working experience of 8 years min as Business Analyst bull Strong background in financial reference data and capital markets, fund services and custody on financial products bull Data analysis and mapping (able to query data, analyze and map) bull College degree, specialized training or equivalent work experience bull Data Oriented with an excellent attention to detail bull Experienceunderstanding of business process reengineering and business modeling concepts, business systems development and analysis bull Strong analytical skills and writing skills, to include solid experience in writing functional and technical specifications bull Strong SQL knowledge bull Must possess good communication skills with the ability to be assertive bull Ability to focus on high quality work while under pressure Preferred Skills bull Experience working with major vendor data providers (ie, Bloomberg, Reuters, IDC, Markit) bull Project managementlead experience bull Experience working closely with IT Project managers and development teams bull Knowledge of MS Office, Visio bull Experience with vendor product implementation,Data Analyst Contract New York City

Job # 440
Provides strategic and tactical support to the organization by analyzing and interpreting the data to provide creative solutions.
Provides strategic and tactical support to the organization by analyzing and interpreting the
Task & Deliverables:
Review desktop software used in environment in preparation for Windows 10 migrations by working closely with team that pulls data from Microsoft SCCM and runs the needed SQL queries
Scrub software inventory to remove non-software such as patches, etc.
Research unknowns using Internet Browsers, internal tools and better judgment to validate if true software or if it can be excluded
Research to determine what software are Microsoft Office plugins
Compare each software product to internal database to determine
Windows 10 certification status
Latest available software package number
If software package requires unique license key for activation post installation
Use pre-determined software categories to classify each line item of software
Review scrubbed data to ensure updates are being reflected for each Business Units set of software Repair or create Microsoft Excel formulas as needed
Once software is properly scrubbed, reviewed and classified we should be able to identify which software has already been internally Windows 10 certified, not yet certified/packaged, unknown software, for each Business Unit
Provide daily updates to team on analysis
Skills Required:
Expert with Microsoft Excel
Familiar with SQL Queries
Familiar with desktop software
Software Asset Management (SAM) experience is a plus
Excellent attention to detail
Well organized
Powered by JazzHR,Title: Tech Business/Data Analyst

Location: New York, NY

Duration: 6+ Months

Responsibilities
Be embedded within any number of technology teams supporting different business lines or functions, with the goal of identifying and solving data quality issues by understanding and documenting their front-to-back architecture, processes and data flows, developing a roadmap for the evolution of that architecture and executing on the roadmap.
Leverage strong technical focus and demonstrable experience of architecting technology solutions along with deep business knowledge in a particular area to realize tangible business benefits through adopting the data strategy and architecture principles.
Develop and maintain relationships with stakeholders in both Technology and the Business outside your immediate area of expertise, and affect real change in both business process and technical architecture.
Be resilient to setbacks and relentless in the pursuit of the real strategic solutions for complex business problems
Additional responsibilities will be to engage in a number of division-wide front-to-back business problems, understand and document the impact, and propose and gain support for solutions
The role offers many opportunities to build a wide and diverse network and have a broad and deep impact across departments.
Excellent track record of business analysis, application product development and delivery of complex global projects in Financial services domain
Excellent communication and problem-solving skills
Project and Program management experience
Ability to work with senior stakeholders, bringing different teams together to execute on a plan towards a common goal.
Experience with Agile Software Development Lifecycle methodology and related tooling. For example - Agile plug-ins for JIRA, Scrum and Product backlog management, BDD using tools like JBehave or Cucumber etc.
Demonstrable experience in utilizing strong business and technology skills to solve data-centric business problems
Excellent understanding of data administration and management functions (collection, analysis, distribution etc.
A good understanding of information management practices including information lifecycle management, data modelling, master data management and carrying out business audits and requirements gathering
Experience in leading a data governance programmer
An understanding of relevant statutory frameworks applying to data governance such as the (eg Data Protection Act)
Specialist knowledge of data governance principles and practices
Experience in working with Business and Technology departments to develop and execute on a data strategy, data architecture to solve data quality issues, eliminate data redundancy and streamline front to back data flows
Demonstrated knowledge and skills in enterprise data management, data governance, data quality principles & methodologies.
Experience with data-centric tools and technologies around Data Lineage, Dictionaries, common data access APIs, golden source identification / master data management, ontology/taxonomy development, Data DevOps, Metadata management
Experience with curating, organizing and classifying the data with appropriate concept models and developing taxonomies and/or ontologies in RDF/OWL or other formal knowledge representation system
Experience working with various front-to-back groups like Sales and Trading, Quants, Operations, Finance, Treasury, Settlements, Documentation/Confirmations, Market Risk, Credit Risk, Liquidity Risk, Collateral and Margins; and understanding of data-centric issues that these groups face and possible solutions.
Understanding of various front, middle and back office functions including but not limited to Pricing, Trade Capture, RFQ, “Position, Risk and PnL Management”, physical settlement, various Lifecycle events (Unwind, Upsize, Redemption, Retirement, Autocall, Novations, Corporate Actions)
Excellent understanding of Equity Structured Products, OTC Derivatives and Swaps- Pre-trade and trade capture functions as well as front-to-back Lifecycle management.
Experience with front to back functions across multiple asset classes – Equity, Fixed Income, Commodities, FX, Credit etc.
Experience in designing and delivering computer applications via established software development lifecycle models like Agile; with a good understanding of phases in the lifecycle.
Technical background with emphasis on data architecture and data flows.
Experience with SQL for Sybase/DB2 databases
Experience with analysis, design, development and support of multi-tier desktop or server side distributed applications written using technologies like Java, C#, Perl, Python, Sybase/DB2, and Object Oriented Programming principles.
Be the primary point of contact for assigned pursuits to work with the sales team for developing strategies, collateral and solutions that meet the business needs of clients
Map the business requirement to the sales portfolio appropriate for clients
Work with each Service Line and Horizontal to ensure portfolio is translated and applied to each solution proposal correctly for maximum benefit in terms of cost, fit and strategy
Own a deal from assignment to closure and work with assigned sales staff to create the ideal winning proposal and execute on all presentations, submissions and internal approval processes
Qualifications / Minimum qualifications
Master’s degree or equivalent in Computer Science or Computational Mathematics or relevant experience developing applications for a global financial services institution; or Bachelor’s degree in same fields,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

HIJi8kPaeK,Req ID: 97054

NTT DATA Services strives to hire exceptional, innovative and passionate individuals who want to grow with us. If you want to be part of an inclusive, adaptable, and forward-thinking organization, apply now.

We are currently seeking a Sr. Data Analyst to join our team in Arlington, Virginia (US-VA), United States (US).
After the initial action plan is accepted, the contractor shall provide an Implementation Plan mapping out the best way to accomplish the Initial Action Plan. The Implementation Plan shall include at a minimum the steps needed to occur, risks and mitigations, potential roadblocks and how they may be handled, technical infrastructure plans (for both analytics and reporting), and timelines.

Working closely with agency staff, the contractor shall work as a team on data packaging to bring together separate but related datasets from within the agency, and as appropriate, complimentary external data sources.

The contractor shall proactively work with feature engineering to improve machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms for the facilitation and discovery of problematic and suspicious trends, patterns and relationships. Honing in on gradual change and anomalous activity in datasets over time to create short-, intermediate- and long-term results oriented packages for agency investigators.

The contractors shall work with agency staff to develop and implement Data Reporting. These reports shall productionize the data analytics produced during this contract. These reports must be user friendly and provided seamlessly to the investigators and other end users for client via classified computing system. All reporting shall be validated for accuracy and sourcing and the contractor shall provide explainable documentation for all reports as requested by agency personnel.

The contractor shall provide a Training Plan that shall include plans for training end users on the reports provided to the end users, possible avenues for training are on-line training for non-local users, videos, and one-on-one training for local users.

Requirements

10 years total experience in intelligence research and analysis, data analysis, forsenic accounting, investigations or any combination

5+ years in-depth knowledge and proficiency in MS Excel, PowerBI, and/or other data analytic/visualization tools in order to design and build formulas, charts, links, pivot tables, etc.

2+ years’ experience with the ability to manipulate unstructured data from different platforms
2+ years experience in Technology, statistics, computer information systems; auditing; investigative; mathematics; and units of measure

Must be able to obtain a Public Trust

B.A. or B.S. degree; Educational background in Data Science, is a plus

About NTT DATA Services

NTT DATA Services is a global business and IT services provider specializing in digital, cloud and automation across a comprehensive portfolio of consulting, applications, infrastructure and business process services. We are part of the NTT family of companies, a partner to 85 % of the Fortune 100.

NTT DATA Services is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, gender, disability, age, veteran-status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other class protected by law.

Nearest Major Market: Arlington Virginia
Nearest Secondary Market: Washington DC
Job Segment:
Database, Consulting, Information Systems, Cloud, Systems Analyst, Technology,The organization is actively pursuing a Data Analyst who will support our product, sales, leadership and marketing teams with insights gained from analyzing company data. The ideal candidate is adept at using large data sets to find opportunities for product and process optimization and using models to test the effectiveness of different courses of action. They must have strong experience using a variety of data mining/data analysis methods, using a variety of data tools, building and implementing models, using/creating algorithms and creating/running simulations. They must have a proven ability to drive business results with their data-based insights. They must be comfortable working with a wide range of stakeholders and functional teams. The right candidate will have a passion for discovering solutions hidden in large data sets and working with stakeholders to improve business outcomes.-Develop complex data processing and data reporting solutions -Develop, troubleshoot and enhance Cognos cubes and reports -Development of Dashboard and Analytical reporting solutions using RDBMS and other data Analytics technologies -Expert in development of Tableau reports -Work with stakeholders throughout the organization to identify opportunities for leveraging company data to drive business solutions. -Mine and analyze data from company databases to drive optimization and improvement of product development, marketing techniques and business strategies. -Assess the effectiveness and accuracy of new data sources and data gathering techniques. -Develop custom data models and algorithms to apply to data sets. -Use predictive modeling to increase and optimize customer experiences, revenue generation, ad targeting and other business outcomes. -Coordinate with different functional teams to implement models and monitor outcomes. -Develop processes and tools to monitor and analyze model performance and data accuracy. -Database design, model and development for enterprise reporting database -Investigates and corrects software defects and analyzes and maintains data quality -Prepare comprehensive documentation Skills/Qualifications Required: -We’re looking for someone with 5-7 years of experience manipulating data sets and building statistical models, has a Bachelor’s or Master’s degree in Statistics, Mathematics, Computer Science or another quantitative field, and is familiar with the following software/tools: -Coding knowledge and experience with several languages: .NET, C#, Java, JavaScript, etc. -Knowledge and experience in statistical and data mining techniques: GLM/Regression, Random Forest, Boosting, Trees, text mining, social network analysis, etc. -Experience querying databases and using statistical computer languages: R, Python, SLQ, etc. -Experience using web services: Redshift, S3, Spark, DigitalOcean, etc. -Experience creating and using advanced machine learning algorithms and statistics: regression, simulation, scenario analysis, modeling, clustering, decision trees, neural networks, etc. -Experience analyzing data from 3rd party providers: Google Analytics, Site Catalyst, Coremetrics, Adwords, Crimson Hexagon, Facebook Insights, etc. -Experience with distributed data/computing tools: Map/Reduce, Hadoop, Hive, Spark, Gurobi, MySQL, etc. -Experience visualizing/presenting data for stakeholders using: Tableau, Cognos, Power BI, etc. -Strong problem solving skills with an emphasis on product development. -Experience using statistical computer languages (R, Python, SLQ, etc.) to manipulate data and draw insights from large data sets. -Hands on experience with SQL query development, using analytical functions -Experience working with and creating data architectures. -Knowledge of a variety of machine learning techniques (clustering, decision tree learning, artificial neural networks, etc.) and their real-world advantages/drawbacks. -Knowledge of advanced statistical techniques and concepts (regression, properties of distributions, statistical tests and proper usage, etc.) and experience with applications. -Excellent written and verbal communication skills for coordinating across teams. -A drive to learn and master new technologies and techniques. -Financial Services experience (Mutual Fund background preferred) -Knowledge of the Agile software development process -Superb communication (written and oral) and interpersonal skills,Position Details:

Job Title: Data Analyst

Location: New York City, NYC

Duration: Long Term

Interview Mode: Only 1 Round Direct Face to Face Mandatory.

Note: Only Independent Candidates Who can work on W2/1099(EITHER RATE/SALARY+BENEFITS)

VISA:(US Citizen, GC, GC-EAD and OPT-EAD also works ON W2/1099)

NOTE: NO H1'S OR No C2C CANDIDATES FOR THIS PARTICULAR ROLE

Description:
Monitor data workflows and analyze data from PEU and partner agencies to evaluate impact,
identify opportunities to improve operational efficiency and drive effective policy development
Generate data visualizations and reports to present to a variety of audiences
Provide expertise in the application of statistics and analysis to data sets collected and utilized
by PEU
Work with PEU Data & Analytics staff to collaborate with other city agencies and organizations
to utilize new technological resources, encourage data sharing and teach best practices for
outreach in a variety of use cases
Develop and maintain tools to implement and facilitate data-driven operations
Â

Preferred Qualifications:
2+ years working with data in government, or in community, issue, labor, or political organizing
Advanced experience using SQL in an academic or professional setting (additionally, knowledge of GIS, Python, and R is preferred)
Experience with data visualization techniques and programs, such as Tableau, and advanced use of Excel
Experience processing, cleaning, manipulating, and analyzing large datasets
Ability to effectively present data in verbal, written and visual formats to technical and nontechnical audiences
A demonstrated interest in public service, civic engagement and improving outcomes for New Yorkers
Eagerness to learn, ask questions and solve problems in a fast-paced environment
Strong written and oral communication skills in English
Minimum Qualification Requirements:

â Bachelor's degree from an accredited institution

â 2+ years of work experience

Â

Thanks,

TechProjects

Lakshmi Narayana

Senior Technical Recruiter

Website:TechProjects

DirectÂ# 732-944-0966

FaxÂ# 732-828-9901

EfaxÂ# 860-371-2599

Email: Lnarayana(@)techprojects.us,Title: Data Engineer/Data Analyst
Location: New York, NY
Contract Position (W2 only)

Roles & Responsibilitie:
Experience in Performance Engineering and Capacity Planning of highly available and scalable application infrastructures.
Experience using databases and statistical modeling techniques to perform data analysis and forecasting.
Experience with high level scripting languages (e.g. Python) to support data analysis and reporting.
Experience with business intelligence or data visualization platforms (e.g. Tableau).
Understanding of network protocols such as TCP/IP and Multicast data flow Capacity & Performance Management Framework.
Establish and maintain a comprehensive application performance management framework.
Drive alignment around best practices, including service design and performance assessment, data collection and analysis, and reporting standards.
Engage technical product teams to integrate their performance management activities into that framework Data Acquisition & Analysis.
Collaborate with the development and infrastructure teams on platform design, implementation, and data flows.
Identify data requirements and metrics to support the monitoring and reporting of system capacity and performance.
Onboard new data sets and perform the requisite data transformations and analytics to support CPM monitoring and reporting.
Use statistical analysis and modeling skills to monitor trends and model future capacity needs.
Regularly report on capacity and performance to senior business leadership and product teams
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,OverviewAt Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Perficient currently has a career opportunity for a Senior Data Analyst with Rochade and Lineage Data Stitching in our NYC office. Must live in NJ or NY or be willing to relocate once cities open. Remote for now.Job Overview:The role of the Senior Data Analyst is for individuals passionate about identifying and delivering the right Business solution for each client. Our Business Consultants have a keen Business orientation with an understanding of how technology can be effectively applied to meet a variety of Business needs.Our Business Consultants fill a number of different roles on our project teams working with a variety of technologies for a wide range of clients. The specific responsibilities vary for each client and each project. Key to the success of our Business Consultants is the willingness and desire to quickly learn the client's industry and the unique requirements of each engagement and to fill whatever role may be required to best support our client's needs.A Business Consultant thrives in challenging environments and accomplishes difficult assignments without significant supervision and instruction. Our Consultants can handle the stress of being accountable for delivery and: complete goals on time, practice strong attention to detail, persevere through tough obstacles, and do not get easily discouraged.The Senior Business Consultant will be involved in the strategic planning of an engagement or helping the client make decisions about their future IT direction. Once a project has begun, the Senior Business Consultant will facilitate key requirements with stakeholders and customers using standard and User Experience techniques. The Senior Business Consultant may be responsible for functional designs, detailed designs and system mapping, wireframes, requirement specifications, and prototypes.The Senior Business Consultant works with the Lead Business Consultant and Senior Project Managers to assist with daily operations exercising time management, communication and collaboration in a fast-paced environment to ensure the successful delivery of projects. The Senior Business Consultant will interface with Perficient technical and business delivery personnel, as well as vendors and customers on a regular basis. May mentor junior Consultants.ResponsibilitiesPerson will be a part of Data Stitching Team* Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of applications to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas.* May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications.* Works closely with client management to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes.* Researches and evaluates alternative solutions and makes recommendations.Qualifications* Must have Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC* ASG Rochade, BecubicData and LineageData Stitching a must.* Experience with building stitching linage inside data catalog tool* Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer* ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISG/Watson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools)Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,Overview

Required Skills
• Minimum 4 Years Experience in SQL 2008/2008R2/2012/2014 database management and related products from Microsoft including PowerShell, Windows 2008R2/2012R2 Server operating systems.
Years of Experience: 4 - 6
• Minimum 4 Years Experience with advanced SQL queries and reading query execution plan, developing and performance tuning complex, SSRS and SSIS-2012 packages.
Years of Experience: 4 - 6
• Minimum 4 Years Experience with SQL 2012 on High Availability configuration, support, and troubleshooting.
Years of Experience: 4 - 6
• Minimum 4 Years Experience with Performance tuning, Performance monitoring, Replication, Log shipping, Database Mirroring, Database capacity planning, Users and Role creation and monitoring.
Years of Experience: 4 - 6,Job Description
Wintellisys, Inc. has joined with a large company in search of a Data Remediation Analyst.

This is a contract position located in New York, NY.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
Champions a customer focused culture to deepen client relationships and leverage broader Bank relationships, systems and knowledge.
Responsible for executing the Domain’s day-to-day data management activities, including remediating data quality issues in their Domain and implementing change management processes.
Responsible for establishing and maintaining strong data management capabilities e.g.:
Developing and maintaining accurate data lineage for critical data (working with IT)
Documentation of end-to-end processes, including EUCs and Key Controls
Establishment of Service Level agreements with appropriate data providers
Establishment of Data quality measurements and reporting
Establishment Issue management process and procedures
Minimum Job Requirements:
Lead the identification and root-cause analysis of data quality issues arising through the data chain, from source system to final report.
Prioritizing data issues and collaborating with business and technology stakeholders to address and remediate issues in a timely manner based on priority and severity.
Work in conjunction with data consumers and Domain stakeholders to support data quality rules, standards, and thresholds to ensure appropriate data quality monitoring practices are in place.
Actively tracking regulatory changes and anticipating the impact these will have on the Domain’s data governance and reporting.
Financial industry experience is required.
A recognized under-graduate degree in business, mathematics, computer science, or a related discipline.
A recognized post-graduate or master’s degree in business, finance, CFA, and/or FRM would be an asset
Knowledge of Compliance standards and best practices, with use of analysis tools for monitoring.
Knowledge of the Bank's financial instruments, capital markets, and wholesale operational processes & controls.
Knowledge of regulatory/liquidity reporting (e.g., 2052A, Liquidity Stress Test, Reg YY, etc.).
Knowledge of AML/ATF legislation regulatory requirements related projects.
Knowledge of requirements gathering, design methodology, and building test cases - detail oriented, analytical, and capable of investigating complex / technical issues.
Able to troubleshoot data related issues and support in the authorization in maintenance and modifications.
Good communication / presentation skills (both oral and written).
Excellent team player by working with cross-departmental business & IT stakeholders.
Highly motivated and committed; capable of working in a dynamic environment with aggressive timelines and multiple work streams running in parallel.
Experience with eliciting and provided requirements and design - detail oriented, analytical, and capable of investigating complex / business issue.
If interested in learning more about Wintellisys and this opportunity, please submit your resume in WORD format for consideration to Vicki Clinton, vclinton@wintellisys.com

Job ID Number: J-222 (Please reference in call or email)

To learn more about our services visit www.wintellisys.com,Role: Data Analyst with Python or Python developer
Location: NY
Duration: Full Time
Assisting users with Python setup and configuration, getting access to data sources within the organization, and responding to their questions
• Performing analysis projects on behalf of the users
• Understand data requirements of the requestor
• Interact with the requestor to handle any changes and updates to the request
• Do required analysis of the data set as required
• Work with the team on data projects to provide timely solutions
• Create and Visualize reports/analysis and share it with the stakeholders

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Title: Role: Data Analyst with Python or Python developer
Location:New York City, NY

Duration: Long Term

Job Description:

·
Assisting users with Python setup and configuration, getting access to data sources within the organization, and responding to their questions

·
Performing analysis projects on behalf of the users

·
Understand data requirements of the requestor

·
Interact with the requestor to handle any changes and updates to the request

·
Do required analysis of the data set as required

·
Work with the team on data projects to provide timely solutions

·
Create and Visualize reports/analysis and share it with the stakeholders

Thank You
Nishant Kumar
Sr. Technical Recruiter
Diverse Lynx LLC.
Office: 732-452-1006, Ext: 237
Direct No: 732-786-4603
Email: nishnat.kumar@diverselynx.com | URL: http://www.diverselynx.com

"for our open requirements, please visit Diverselynx Jobs

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Hi,

Greetings!!!

We do have Immediate requirement with one our client in NY, Looking for local consultant who can take in person Interview.

Job Title: Sr. Data stage and Data Analyst

Location: 33 Beaver street, NYC, NY

Duration: 12+ Months with possible extension

Interview Mode: F2F Mandatory

Data stage and Data Analyst:The ideal candidate will lead Extract, Transform and Load(ETL) developer for the data and metadata that will need to be modeled, and displayed in the system. The candidate will have at least 5 years of experience as an ETL developer and should possess the following skills.

Â

Category

Details

ETL Tool

IBM Information server 9.1/8.5/8.0.1, IBM Websphere (Ascential)<b> DataStage EE/8.0/7.5x2/7.5/7.1/390 Server and Enterprise Edition
(Designer, Manager, Director, Administrator), Quality Stage 7.5/7.0,
Meta Stage, Profile Stage, Informatica

RDBMS

Oracle 8i/9i/10g, IBM DB2, SQL 2008/2008R2/2012/2014, SQL Server

Programming Languages

UNIX Shell Scripting, SQL, PL/SQL

Version Control Tool

Tortoise SVN 1.4.8

Â

Required Skills:
Experience in implementing datastage applications using wide range of RDBMSs like Oracle 8i/9i/10g, DB2, SQL Server etc.
Knowledge of developing DataStage Routines and Custom Stages for Special jobs, created Functions, Stored Procedures, Triggers using SQL, PL/SQL.
Extensively involved in Performance tuning the complex large data loads and long running jobs to optimize run time, resource utilization and increase maintainability.
Experience with Data Modelling, designing of the logical and physical data warehouse schema, including but not limited to implementation of full SDLC of Data warehousingÂProjects with Dimensional Modelling, Star schemas, Snow Flakes Schemas, and Operational Data Store.
Experience with SQ 2012 on High Availability configuration, support, and troubleshooting.
Experience Performance tuning, Performance monitoring, Replication, Log Shipping, Database Mirroring, Database capacity planning, Users and Role creation and monitoring.
Experienced in working in tight schedules meeting deadlines. Excellent work ethics, self-motivated, quick learner and team oriented.
Â

If interested, kindly do share profiles to madhavi(t)impetususa(dot)com and shahab(at)impetususa(dot)com,Job Description
If you are looking for a balanced lifestyle in an intellectually stimulating field with different career options for professionals in the financial sector apply now!

SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE:
5+ years of Financial Data Analysis experience
Bachelor's degree or higher
Data comparison & data analysis
Financial banking knowledge, SQL/Data analysis, Python. Financial Regulatory reporting experience desirable
WHAT WE OFFER:
Medical Benefits
No weekend work
COMPANY DESCRIPTION: an American worldwide banking and financial services holding company headquartered in New York City.

GROWTH OPPORTUNITY:
Career advancement
Increased duties and responsibilities
Keeping up with technology, systems, processes
JOB DESCRIPTION:

Duration: 3 Months

Education: Bachelor's degree

Location: New York, NY

Job Requirements
The B/A has the primary responsibility to gather, analyze, document, and validate the needs of the business stakeholders. The Business Analyst serves as the principal conduit for managing system requirements between the business and the software development team throughout the duration of a project. The primary responsibilities of the Business Analyst include: Elicit business requirements from business users and subject matter experts; Define and document requirements; Analyze and prioritize requirements; Write functional specifications; Model the requirements/specifications; Perform business process design in conjunction with operations teams; Lead requirements validation and traceability analysis; Manage scope and requirements throughout the project lifecycle; Lead development of common standards and tools; Assists in operational rollout and support. The preferred candidate should possess the following: Minimum of 10 years experience within a financial services firm; Excellent oral and written communication skill; A team player who works well with technical and non-technical resources; Ability to take strategic direction from executive management; Initiative; Ability to see tasks through to completion without significant guidance.,SoluStaff is actively recruiting for a full-time Clinical Data Analyst for our client in Brooklyn.

Develop databases and conducting analyses of clinical data
Develop reports and statistical information to be used by management, administrative and/or medical and professional staff.
Develop, maintain and modify data processing, software programs and report forms.

Bachelor’s Degree
Minimum of 2 years’ experience required in developing epidemiologic studies or statistical analyses of clinical data using automated information (may be waived for Masters degree).
Excellent time management, organizational and communication skills, both written and verbal.
Ability to manage and report on many concurrent activities.
Ability to work independently.,Role Senior Data Analyst - Data Cataloging Data Profiling Location Remote for now (Must live in NJ or NY or be willing to relocate once cities open) Duration Long Term Required Skills 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required. Must have Data Scanning and Data Profiling experience. Data cataloging Data Profiling. SQL Server, DB2, Oracle. Must have knowledge of lineage and financial services industry, technical metadata layer. Reliable Software is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Reliable Software does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, non-disqualifying physical or mental disability, national origin, veteran status or any other basis covered by appropriate law. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit, and business need.,Job Description
Hi, Currently am looking OPT Candidates .Net, Sharepoint, Mulesoft, Java, Data Analyst, Business Analysr in USA.
If anyone interested can forward your resumes to thiis mail Id (abinaya.j@hexacorp.com),Position Details:

Job Title: Sr. Datastage and Data Analyst/ETL Datastage Developer

Location:ÂManhattan, New York

Duration: 12+ Months with possible extension for a long run

Interview Mode: Direct In-Person Interview

Â

Datastage and Data Analyst:The ideal candidate will lead Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) developer for the data and metadata that will need to be modeled, and displayed in the system. The candidate will have at least 5 years of experience as an ETL developer and should possess the following skills.

Category

Details

ETL Tool

IBM Information server 9.1/8.5/8.0.1, IBM Websphere (Ascential)<b> DataStage EE/8.0/7.5x2/7.5/7.1/390 Server and Enterprise Edition
(Designer, Manager, Director, Administrator), Quality Stage 7.5/7.0,
Meta Stage, Profile Stage, Informatica

RDBMS

Oracle 8i/9i/10g, IBM DB2, SQL 2008/2008R2/2012/2014, SQL Server

Programming Languages

UNIX Shell Scripting, SQL, PL/SQL

Version Control Tool

Tortoise SVN 1.4.8

Â

Required Skills:
Experience in implementing datastage applications using wide range of RDBMSs like Oracle 8i/9i/10g, DB2, SQL Server etc.
Knowledge of developing DataStage Routines and Custom Stages for Special jobs, created Functions, Stored Procedures, Triggers using SQL, PL/SQL.
Extensively involved in Performance tuning the complex large data loads and long running jobs to optimize run time, resource utilization and increase maintainability.
Experience with Data Modelling, designing of the logical and physical data warehouse schema, including but not limited to implementation of full SDLC of Data warehousingÂProjects with Dimensional Modelling, Star schemas, Snow Flakes Schemas, and Operational Data Store.
Experience with SQ 2012 on High Availability configuration, support, and troubleshooting.
Experience Performance tuning, Performance monitoring, Replication, Log Shipping, Database Mirroring, Database capacity planning, Users and Role creation and monitoring.
Experienced in working in tight schedules meeting deadlines. Excellent work ethics, self-motivated, quick learner and team oriented.
Â

Â

Thanks,

TechProjects

LakshmiNarayana

Senior Technical Recruiter

Website:TechProjects

DirectÂ# 732-944-0966

FaxÂ# 732-828-9901

EfaxÂ# 860-371-2599

Email: Lnarayana@techprojects.us,Title Data Science Lead Analyst Mandatory skills MS Office, R, Excel JIRA, Confluence medical management, clinical UX, CX Hadoop, Machine learning PCA, Principal component analysis Python, Topo, Sem Tableau, Tableau software Unix, UX SQL Hp ux, Integrator user experience, design, Visualization, Assembly Search engine marketing statistical analysis, regression, SEM, PCA FA Description Data Science Lead Analyst Duties Provides advanced professional input to complex Data Science assignmentsprojects. Responsible for the research, extraction and analysis of data. Evaluates and writes reports. May research and analyze algorithms. Provides statistical data trends to business partners such as medical management and underwriting. May also assist in the designing and implementation of systems to analyze and report findings. Combines IT capabilities with advanced clinical knowledge to determine trends, costbenefit ratios, and forecasting of health care costs, medical management, and health economics. Supports and provides direction to more junior professionals. Works autonomously, only requiring ldquoexpertrdquo level technical support from others. Exercises judgment in the evaluation, selection, and adaptation of both standard and complex techniques and procedures. Utilizes in-depth professional knowledge and acumen to develop models and procedures, and monitor trends, within Data Science. Skills Data wrangling and prep for analytics and data science Advanced statistical analysis (e.g. regression, SEM, PCAFA) Data visualization and story telling Presentations to partners and stakeholders Experimental design expertise Journey analytics assembly Experience design experience (UX, CX, etc.) R, Excel Tableau JIRA, Confluence and MS Office Education High School diploma advanced degree in relevant field preferred. 4-6 years of work experience in the Technology field and a broad knowledge of user experience, customer experience or other experience-focused design fields. Skills and Experience Required Skills Statistical analysis Additional skills Data visualization Documentation Integration Mapping Metrics Presentation skills Quantitative Refining User experience Visualization Assembly Data science Deployment Excel Experimental design Hadoop Hp-ux Integrator Jira Machine learning Microsoft excel Microsoft office Ms office Pca Principal component analysis Python Search engine marketing Sem Sql Tableau Tableau software Topo Unix Ux VIVA USA is an equal opportunity employer and is committed to maintaining a professional working environment that is free from discrimination and unlawful harassment. The Management, contractors, and staff of VIVA USA shall respect others without regard to race, sex, religion, age, color, creed, national or ethnic origin, physical, mental or sensory disability, marital status, sexual orientation, or status as a Vietnam-era, recently separated veteran, Active war time or campaign badge veteran, Armed forces service medal veteran, or disabled veteran. Please contact us at hrviva-it.com for any complaints, comments and suggestions. Contact Details Please send your resumes to "staffing10viva-it.com" and one of our recruiter will get in touch with you. VIVA USA INC. 3601 Algonquin Road, Suite 425 Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 staffing10viva-it.com httpwww.viva-it.com,Data Analyst Location NYC, NY Contract12 months PhoneSkype Given the current scenario with Covid 19 - we will have consultants start remote and once everything settles down they will be required to be onsite. Required Experience 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required. Data catalogingdata profiling SQL Server, DB2, Oracle Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer Skills needed for DB Analyst specific Data Scanning Data Profiling" Qualifications Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architectmodeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings transformation rules documentation. Please share resume to sajid.hussainrsrit.com or call me at (W) 248-504-6874 Sajid Hussain (W) 248-504-6874 sajid.hussainrsrit.com (22260 Haggerty Road, Suite285, Northville, MI 48167.,Job Description:

Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve peoples lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Position Urgency:
Normal

Shifts:
M-F 9am to 6pm

State License Details:
Not Needed

Minimum Years of Experience:
5

Specialty Type:
Clerical

Sub Specialty:
Business Analyst- Associate

Bilingual:
No

Holiday Coverage Required:
No,Data Analyst, Capital Markets (Manager) - ITO032952
With a startup spirit and 80,000+ curious and courageous minds, we have the expertise to go deep with the world’s biggest brands—and we have fun doing it. Now, we’re calling all you rule-breakers and adventurous persons who see the world differently, and are aggressive enough to reinvent it. Come, transform with us.

We are inviting applications for the role of Business Analyst (Banking / Capital Markets

In this role, you will be responsible for mapping source to target flows of data attributes from systems of record to a data warehouse or from data warehouse to Analytics models and/or reports. This will go towards crafting requirements to automate feeds into the data warehouse and/or to downstream reporting/analytics layers.

Responsibilities
Break down sophisticated Data into meaningful chunks and synthesize action plans relevant to the business
Proven analytical ability using tools to evaluate data and draw conclusions
Translate key insights, trends and data into meaningful recommendations; prioritize project work into client presentations, outlining findings and recommendations
Build a framework, with a focus on improvement of data quality and the protection of critical data through policies and standards, principles, governance metrics, processes, related tools and data architecture
Crafts mapping of data sources, data movement, interfaces, and analytics. Builds flow diagrams, structure charts, and other types of system, process, data flow representations.
Optimize and update logical and physical data models to support new and existing projects.
Profile data, resolve trends, patterns, inconsistencies, draw conclusions in order to conceptualize DQ rules and recommend business rules.
Translate conceptualize DQ rules into scripts for validation of the proposed rules and recommend improvements based on data domains, product type, client specific data and systems layout.
Data Transformation, Data Enrichments, data warehouse and data delivery techniques using Ab Initio as ETL environment.
Define critical metric to measure and presenting data quality controls to senior management/partners
Coordinate User Acceptance Testing with business user community and QA teams. Develop UAT test cases and test scripts for manual and automated data load validation and approval. Execute UAT test scripts and document results of test scripts for review and approval.
Collaborate and coordinate with offshore and onsite team members to fulfill the BA responsibilities from project initiation to post-implementation.
Manage changes to requirements and baseline through a change control process
Qualifications
Minimum qualifications we seek in you!
College education required (Preferably in financial/Data specialization)
knowledge of Capital Markets Finance domain.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills. Prior experience interacting extensively with users.
Good understanding of the capital markets is a plus
Prior data analysis/data profiling experience (quantifying the issue, identifying trends & patterns)
Strong analytical & problem solving capabilities to break sophisticated problems into simpler ones.
Experience and detailed knowledge with Master Data Management, ETL, Data Quality, metadata management, data profiling, micro-batches, streaming data loads.
Experience on Informatica IDQ or in any DQ tools is added advantage
Experience in implementing database solutions on MS SQL Server, Oracle and DB2 required.
Preferred qualifications
Prior experience/exposure to traded products data modeling is highly preferred
Bachelor’s degree in information technology, business, or related field, or any equivalent combination of education and experience required.
Experience in CCAR calculation allocation to regulatory schedule line item level.
Experience in using Collibra tool for data management, prepare template for ready use/ upload and deployment is desirable
Genpact is an Equal Opportunity Employer and considers applicants for all positions without regard to race, color, religion or belief, sex, age, national origin, citizenship status, marital status, military/veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, physical or mental disability or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws. Genpact is committed to crafting a dynamic work environment that values diversity and inclusion, respect and integrity, customer focus, and innovation. For more information, visit
www.genpact.com . Follow us on
Twitter ,
Facebook ,
LinkedIn , and
YouTube .

Job
Senior Principal Consultant
Primary Location
United States-South Carolina
Education Level
Bachelor's / Graduation / Equivalent
Job Posting
Jun 26, 2020, 5:46:49 PM
Unposting Date
Aug 25, 2020, 6:29:00 PM
Master Skills List Corporate
Job Category Full Time,Title Data AnalystData Acquisition Speciliest with Financial Industry Exp Location NYC, NY Duration 6+ Months Education Qualification Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Technology (IT), or closely related field. Masterrsquos in Computer Science or related degree Job Description Data Acquisition Role Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architectmodeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings transformation rules documentation. 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required.Data catalogingdata profilingbull SQL Server, DB2, Oraclebull Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer Contact Details Name Sudheer Email ID sudheerrsrit.com Phone number 248-221-1432 ldquoReliable Software is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Reliable Software does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, non-disqualifying physical or mental disability, national origin, veteran status or any other basis covered by appropriate law. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit, and buess need.rdquo,Title Data AnalystData Scanning with Financial Industry exp Location NYC, NY Duration 6+ Months Education Qualification Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Technology (IT), or closely related field. Masterrsquos in Computer Science or related degree Job Description Data Scanning Team - Responsible for determining systems requirements for new or modified database application programs, creates the system specifications and Is responsible for the development, testing and implementation of efficient, cost effective application solutions. Will receive general direction from the Manager, work closely with business analysts to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. May co-ordinate the activities of the section with the client area and other IT sections (e.g., data base, operations, technical support). Work in conjunction with the data architectmodeler on the data warehouse reporting solution. Possess expertise in writing and tuning, view, stored procedures, and functions. Strong problem-solving, interpersonal, written and oral communications skills with demonstrated ability to simultaneously adjust to changing priorities, successfully completing multiple tasks. Prepares deliverables such as source-to-target mappings transformation rules documentation. 7-10 Years of relevant work experience required. Data catalogingdata profiling bull SQL Server, DB2, Oracle bull Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer Skills needed for DB Analyst specificData ScanningData Profiling" Contact Details Name Sudheer Email ID sudheerrsrit.com Phone number 248-221-1432 ldquoReliable Software is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Reliable Software does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, non-disqualifying physical or mental disability, national origin, veteran status or any other basis covered by appropriate law. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit, and buess need.rdquo,Role Senior Data Analyst - Data Governance Location Remote for now (Must live in NJ or NY or be willing to relocate once cities open) Duration Long Term Required Skills Strong data analysis and data modeling skills on large, enterprise-based initiatives. Data Catalogs Data mapping logical models to physical models Working knowledge of data architectures, data normalization and data classification Hands-on experience with industry leading data governance tools. In depth experience in applications project-related data analysis. Excellent analytical, problem solving and conceptual skills. Good project discipline, operating as part of a team or across teams to reach agreement to the enterprise view of the data Implementing best practices for data governance practices related to standard naming, data definitions, taxonomy SOFT SKILLS Excellent verbal and written communication skills with an ability to express complex business rules in a data model and to interpret the data rules from a data model. Strong interpersonal skills. Presentation skills Ability to shape communication for different audiences Ability to work well on cross-functional project teams within Technology, Product and the business environment. Reliable Software is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Reliable Software does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, non-disqualifying physical or mental disability, national origin, veteran status or any other basis covered by appropriate law. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit, and business need.,Job Description:

Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve peoples lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Position Urgency:
Normal

Shifts:
M-F 8am to 5pm

State License Details:
Not Needed

Minimum Years of Experience:
5

Specialty Type:
Clerical

Sub Specialty:
Business Analyst- Associate

Bilingual:
No

Holiday Coverage Required:
No,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

ZPQRqYj0s4,The Senior Business Consultant will be involved in the strategic planning of an engagement or helping the client make decisions about their future IT direction. Once a project has begun, the Senior Business Consultant will facilitate key requirements with stakeholders and customers using standard and User Experience techniques. The Senior Business Consultant may be responsible for functional designs, detailed designs and system mapping, wireframes, requirement specifications, and prototypes. Responsibilities Person will be a part of Data Stitching Team Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of applications to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas. May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications. Works closely with client management to identify and specify complex business requirements and processes. Researches and evaluates alternative solutions and makes recommendations. Top three skills Data Catalog, Informatica IDC, Informatica EDC Build stitching linage inside data catalog tool bull Must have knowledge of lineage and financial industry, technical metadata layer bull ASG DI or shade tool, IBM ISGWatson, Informatica IMM or ECD (data lineage tools) Skills Needed for Application Analyst ASG Rochade, BecubicData LineageData Stitching.,Overview

Role: Sr. Tableau Consultant
Work location: Whippany, NJ
Duration: 6 Months

Includes Data Modeler, Data Miner.) Responsible for importing, cleaning, transforming, validating and modeling data with the purpose of understanding and drawing conclusions from data (may be presented in charts, graphs, and/or tables). Also, design and develop relational databases for collecting and storing data and build and design data input and data collection mechanisms.

Required Skills and Experience:

You are responsible for data related activities such as data extraction, profiling, cleansing, de-duplication, standardization, conversion, transformation and loading, data mining, warehousing, archiving and reporting. Responsible for all activities required to ensure optimum performance and data integrity of databases in production environments, in line with the requirements. Responsible for server based databases in development and test environments including database software installation, database creation, performance and capacity design, backup and recovery design, security design.

Qualifications: 3-9 years experience, Bachelor's Degree.
Should be proficient in Software Engineering Techniques, Software Engineering Architecture, Software Engineering Lifecycle and Data Management.
Should have progressing skills in Business Analysis, Business Knowledge, Software Engineering Leadership, Architecture Knowledge and Technical Solution Design.
5-8 years experience in Tableau
Lead engagements with business stakeholders to identify and define analytics use cases with hypotheses for measurable business value
Identify and define leading KPI's and variables to target business outcomes and goals
Create dashboard designs (wireframes) and product features to make dashboards outcome-driven and actionable
Create interactive dashboards and visualizations leveraging Tableau based on KPI definitions and dashboard designs
Design and build performance-optimized Tableau data extracts
Deliver transformative solutions to clients via adoption best practices and promotion of an analytics culture
Provide thought leadership in data space

In the COMMENTS include:

Legal name:

Phone #:

Email address:

Daily Rate:

DOB (Date and Month) :

Skype ID :

Location (City and State):

Relocate:

Availability to start:

Visa type and expiration:

Hiring Status: C2C/W2/1099

Open for CTH:

Timeslots for phone conversation:

Timeslots for WebEx/video interview :

Summary:

Thanks Regards,

Syed Raza

Desk Number: 585 - 532 - 7200 Extension 9002

687 Lee Road, Suite 250, Rochester, NY 14606

Email : Syed.j@avanitechsolutions.com

Email: syed_j@iic.com

Gmail hangouts: syedraza199025@gmail.com

www.iic.com

www.avanitechsolutions.com,Description
Data Services Lead Analyst -PM/BA/DA
Title Vice President
Salaried plus Benefits
Location: Tampa or Buffalo
No Third Parties/No Sponsorship
====================================
Respond to:

The Data Services Lead Analyst is a strategic professional who stays
abreast of developments within own field and contributes to
directional strategy by considering their application in own job and
the business. Recognized technical authority for Secured Financing
Products, specifically Repurchase agreements. Developed communication
and diplomacy skills are required in order to guide, influence and
convince others, in particular colleagues in other areas. Significant
impact on the area through complex deliverables. Provides advice and
counsel related to the technology or operations of the business.
Responsibilities: Business Analyst and Project Manager Lead for
migrating systems associated with Secured Financing Transactions.
Products include Repurchase Agreements and Buy/Sells.
Meet with constituents to understand and document the business
requirements for the migration of these SFT products to a new back
office clearance system.
Working with a team of Finance, Operations, Front Office and
Technology professionals to build the requirements for a Global
Product Processor for all Repos and Buy/Sells. This single Product
Processor will cover the requirements for all regions and settlement
platforms.
Partner and drive Technology solutions including:

Own Business Requirement Documents (BRD)
Coordinate with business and technology partners throughout the SDLC
lifecycle
Oversee and steer functional requirements process with technology
partners
Oversee and write test scenarios and drive UAT planning and
implementation and data acquisitions
Coordinate and provide analysis and interpretation of UAT results
System / Enhancement rollout and training
Plan and develop cost analysis, design considerations, and
implementation timelines
Present ideas and recommendations to senior management
Make strategic decisions as to future of infrastructure and process
decisions related to Data Quality initiatives
Qualifications:
8-10+ years of experience in business analysis, audit, financial
reporting, system integration, business transformation, project
management preferred
Knowledge of Fixed Income, Equities, Derivatives Instruments,
Secured Financing; and some knowledge in accounting and financial
calculations, such as P&L, dividends, coupons, accretion
Financial control and/or product control experience is a plus
Be able to manage project milestones and risks
Understand general ledger posting
Experience in system analysis and writing business and functional
specifications is a plus
Strong data analysis, data mapping and reconciliation skills
Excellent verbal and written communication skills, be proactive
and motivated individual
Excellent communication and analytical skills.
Knowledge of Citi Infrastructure such as Back Office, Clearance
and General Ledgers is a plus
Bachelors/University degree and / or equivalent experience,Backfill Position Details:

Job Title:ÂIBMÂDataStage Developer orÂDataÂAnalyst

Location: Manhattan, NY

Duration: 24 months Plus

Mode of Interview: Only 1 Round Direct In-Person, So NY/NJ Locals required

Â

Description:

Required Skills:

Minimum 8 Years' experience inÂETLÂTools like -ÂIBMÂInformation Server 9.1/8.5/8.0.1,ÂIBMÂWebSphere (Ascential)ÂDataStageÂEE/8.0/7.5x2/7.5/7.1/390 Server and Enterprise Edition (Designer, Manager, Director, Administrator), QualityÂStageÂ7.5/7.0, MetaÂStage, ProfileÂStage, Informatica

Minimum 8 Years' experience in RDBMS like - Oracle 8i/9i/10g,ÂIBMÂDB2, SQL 2008/2008R2/2012/2014, SQL Server.

Minimum 8 Years' experience in Programming Languages like - UNIX Shell Scripting, SQL, PL/SQL.

Minimum 8 Years' experience in Version Control Tool - Tortoise SVN 1.4.8

Experience in implementingÂdatabase applications using wide range of RDBMSs like Oracle 8i/9i/10g, DB2, SQL Server etc.,

Knowledge of developingÂDataStageÂRoutines and CustomÂStages for special jobs, created Functions, Stored Procedures, Triggers using SQL, PL/SQL

Extensively involved in performance tuning the complex largeÂdataÂloads and long running jobs to optimize run time, resource utilization and increase maintainability

Experience withÂDataÂModelling, designing of the logical and physicalÂdataÂwarehouse schema, including but not limited to implementation of full SDLC ofÂDataÂWarehousing Projects with Dimensional Modelling, Star Schemas, snow Flake Schemas, and OperationalÂDataÂStore

Experience with Experience with SQL 2012 on High Availability configuration, support, and troubleshooting

Experience with Performance tuning, Performance monitoring, Replication, Log shipping,ÂDatabase Mirroring,ÂDatabase capacity planning, Users and Role creation and monitoring

Experienced in working in tight schedules meeting deadlines. Excellent work ethics, self-motivated, quick learner and team oriented.

Â,Data Quality Management Analyst. Location New York city Duration Long Term Data Catologing Informatica EDC Data Quality Management Phone-----Video Job Description Responsible for the design, development, coding, testing, debugging and documentation of Informatica's Enterprise Data Catalog tool to satisfy the requirements of one or more user areas. May include hands-on new development as well as support, maintenance or enhancement of existing applications. Works closely with Business Analysts to identify and specify requirements and processes associate with Scanning and Profiling data within the enterprise. THANKS Azaruddin Shaik Senior Technical Recruiter (O) 248-780-7854 (M) 248-600-0432 azaruddin.srsrit.com mailtoazaruddin.srsrit.com 22260 Haggerty Road, Suite285, Northville MI - 48167 www.rsrit.com httpwww.rsrit.com Check out my professional profile and connect with me on LinkedIn httpswww.linkedin.cominshaik-azaruddin-b1843ab1 httpswww.linkedin.cominshaik-azaruddin-b1843ab1,Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and âœcleanâ data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR,The SAP Data Analyst verifies and enters all Customer Master, Material Master Vendor Master and Pricing Information for SBS and organizes various reporting requirements related to new and changed master data information. The SDA must thoroughly understand the SAP design of the customer master, material master and pricing files and the SBS database in order to ensure the accuracy of the data and functionality of the system. The SAP Data Analyst will maintain, analyze, make system /process recommendations and complete all SBS centralized functions. The SAP Data Analyst must maintain a high level of customer service with field sales and support people and with the SBS management team.

Manage, Analyze and update master data records for consolidation/deletion, and enhance master data content in SAP for SBS division, ensuring integrity and accuracy as required.
Develop, recommend and implement business process enhancements, as well as design and execute SAP queries as needed for data analysis, quality and governance
Coordinates new product introduction and ensures master data coding conventions are applied as it relates to proper configuration within SAP and product availability.
Input data into the SAP system for new/existing products and make necessary changes to existing SAP data for current products. This master data includes, but not limited to Material Masters, Bill of Materials, Classifications, Configuration Profiles, Info Records, Pricing, Vendors and Customers.
Maintain the SAP tables such as product hierarchies, authorization groups and authorization codes that are related to the dealer database.
Trouble-shoot production issues, and if appropriate make necessary corrections to the associated master data setup, with the goal of avoiding future issues.
Assist in establishing best practices, policies and Sop’s for customer master data maintenance and monitoring
Provide guidance and recommendations to business units to enhance the quality of customer, material, vendor and pricing master data
Produce SBS listings, mailing lists and any other reports and output needed from the SBS master data.
Create and process all centralized functions for SBS.
Communicates issues and concerns between data team and SBS field personal and help to develop solutions for issues and concerns.
Provide timely customer service to all SBS field locations, SBS management, Third party partners.
Other duties as assigned.

3+ years as a Business Analyst or Supply Chain Analyst, with reporting and Customer analysis experience, SAP Master Data or Data Maintenance
SAP/BW/BI experience preferred.
Data extraction from various systems and data manipulation skills, including Microsoft Excel (pivot tables,) SQL and Access a Plus
Proficient in standard Microsoft Office Applications (Word, Excel, PowerPoint) SQL a Plus
3+ year’s SAP query building preferred
Excellent verbal and written skills required. Must interface with management and field personnel, and external customers. Must be able to work in a team setting, as well as individually with minimal supervision.
Excellent analytical skills required; must be able to quickly analyze SAP master data issues for resolution.
Bachelor’s Degree, or equivalent work experience
Ability to train others a plus.
Sharp Electronics Corporation is proud to be an equal opportunity employer: minority/female/disability/veteran.
#LI – SD1,Overview

Role: Senior Data Analyst

Location: Brooklyn, NY

Duration: 6 Months

Required Skills
Minimum 5-7 Years’ Experience in SQL 2008/2008R2/2012/2014 database management and related products from Microsoft including PowerShell, Windows 2008R2/2012R2 Server operating systems.
Minimum 5-7 Years’ Experience with advanced SQL queries and reading query execution plan, developing and performance tuning complex, SSRS and SSIS-2012 packages
Minimum 5-7 Years’ Experience with SQL 2012 on High Availability configuration, support, and troubleshooting
Minimum 5-7 Years’ Experience with Performance tuning, Performance monitoring, Replication, Log shipping, Database Mirroring, Database capacity planning, Users and Role creation and monitoring,Idexcelrsquos client is looking for Data EngineerAnalyst to join their team on a Contract to hire basis. Below is the job Description Job Title Data EngineerAnalyst Location Salt Lake City, UT (REMOTE Till COVID-19) Duration Long Term Job Discription The Senior Data Analyst will work with partners from all business units and other partners to define and detail data reporting requirements for UID initiative. The Analyst evaluates and validates new and existing functions, identifies and analyzes end-user issues and provides support through standardized processes, tools, workflow analysis and testing to ensure end-user requirements are fulfilled. This is a data engineering role that must have AWS experience - AWS Certification are highly preferable Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop etc. too. 5+ years of associated work experience Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses BI systems Knowledge of big data and analytical technologies Knowledge of Cloud Architecture and services Detailed analytical abilities Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills Yoursquore advanced working SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases and data warehouses Your knowledge of Data Lake and Big Data Architectures Yoursquore advanced working experience in data analysis, requirement analysis, test case development and technical specifications development Your experience with data normalization and de-normalization techniques Your background building processes supporting data transformation, data structures, metadata, dependency and workload management. Your background supporting and working with multi-functional teams in a dynamic environment. Your solid data management and interpersonal skills Note You can also share your resume directly to praveenlal.kidexcel.com About IDEXCEL, INC Idexcel is a global staffing and IT services organization, with a mission to bring great people and great organizations together. Our diverse client base represents a wide range of industries, including technology, telecom, insurance, healthcare, manufacturing, banking financial services, food commodities trading and federal organizations. Our teams of experienced recruiters directly work with client companies seeking exceptional people to help with their business initiatives. Idexcel, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, military status, national origin or any other characteristic protected under federal, state, or applicable local law.,Location Salt Lake City, UT Duration 6 month increments Req Notes This is a data engineering role that must have AWS experience - aws certs are highly preferable Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop etc too. Sr Data Analyst The Senior Data Analyst will work with partners from all business units and other partners to define and detail data reporting requirements for UID initiative. The Analyst evaluates and validates new and existing functions, identifies and analyzes end-user issues and provides support through standardized processes, tools, workflow analysis and testing to ensure end-user requirements are fulfilled. 5+ years of associated work experience Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses BI systems Knowledge of big data and analytical technologies Knowledge of Cloud Architecture and services Detailed analytical abilities Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills The Skills You Bring Your advanced working SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases and data warehouses Your knowledge of Data Lake and Big Data Architectures Your advanced working experience in data analysis, requirement analysis, test case development and technical specifications development Your experience with data normalization and denormalization techniques Your background building processes supporting data transformation, data structures, metadata, dependency and workload management. Your background supporting and working with multi-functional teams in a dynamic environment. Your solid data management and interpersonal skills Derek Kunz 248 802 8002 derekkvedsoft.com,Job Description
Company Description

ClientSolv Technologies is an IT solution firm with over a decade of experience serving Fortune 1000 companies, public sector and small to medium sized companies. ClientSolv Technologies is a woman-owned and operated company that is certified as a WMBE, 8a firm by the Federal government's Small Business Administration.

Job Description

You will be responsible for:
Enabling a proper enterprise Data Lake in AWS
Engaging regularly with stakeholders to understand and implement business logic
Building models and tools to get value out of the mass amounts of data we have in our environment
Enabling the best, most personalized and resilient customer experience possible
Qualifications

A successful Data Analyst will:
Be available to work onsite out of our American Fork, UT office
Have a 4-year college degree in Math, Engineering, Statistics or Computer Science
4+ years professional enterprise experience
Open to occasional travel for quarterly planning meetings and or other key workshops
Strong SQL experience
ELK Stack / HDFS / Hadoop / Hive
Linux
AWS Big Data Tools: S3, Kinesis, Red Shift, Athena
Java, Python, R, SQL
Predictive Analytics
Kafka / Confluent
Additional Information

3- 6 months contract to Hire,About Shape Security:
We are security and web experts, pioneers, evangelists, and elite researchers. We believe in the power of the Internet to be a positive force; our mission is to protect every website and mobile app from cybercriminals. Shape’s founders fought cybercrime at the Pentagon, Google, and other leading security companies. We are backed by some of the most prominent leaders and investors in the technology industry including Kleiner Perkins, Google Ventures, and more. Come be a part of our unparalleled team that is responsible for making the Internet a safer place for everyone.

Shape Security is seeking a driven, analytical and highly professional individual who is looking to take on new challenges as an analyst in our Threat Intelligence team.

This role has an engaging mix of data analytics and customer/business engagement. It involves big data analysis and presentations to executive audiences, as well as production of marketing collateral, hosting webinars, co-authoring industry papers and assisting the Sales team by presenting to prospective and POC customers.

If you have a passion for deriving actionable insights from complex big data sets, love to work with intricate statistical analysis, and want to be a subject matter expert (SME) in web and mobile security, then we’d love to talk with you.
Customer-Facing Responsibilities:
Detailed big data analysis of the web and mobile traffic of Global 2000 organizations and produce intelligence reports/presentations for their senior management.
Provide ad-hoc data analysis for customers on an as and when basis.
Provide thought leadership to existing and prospective clients on how to better secure themselves and their customers by sharing learnings from other Shape deployments and research.
Work cross-functionally to guide the future of our analytics product.
Marketing-Focused Responsibilities:
Become a subject matter expert through exposure to Shape’s proprietary data and internal teams.
Assist marketing with the production of blog articles, hosting of webinars and provision of data for marketing campaigns and research papers.
Speak at industry and internal conferences to share results of analysis and research.
Provide on-boarding training for new Shape Sales Executives.
Requirements:
5+ years analytical experience working with large-scale datasets.
Excellent communication and presentation skills.
Strong interpersonal skills, personable, and persistent.
Strong proficiency in SQL and/or Python.
A demonstrated enthusiasm and capacity to learn new technologies quickly.
Relevant academic qualifications.,We are currently sourcing for a Senior Data Analyst to work Salt Lake City, UT. Duration 6 month increments Req Notes This is a data engineering role that must have AWS experience - aws certs are highly preferable Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop etc too. Sr Data Analyst The Senior Data Analyst will work with partners from all business units and other partners to define and detail data reporting requirements for UID initiative. The Analyst evaluates and validates new and existing functions, identifies and analyzes end-user issues and provides support through standardized processes, tools, workflow analysis and testing to ensure end-user requirements are fulfilled. 5+ years of associated work experience Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses BI systems Knowledge of big data and analytical technologies Knowledge of Cloud Architecture and services Detailed analytical abilities Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills The Skills You Bring Your advanced working SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases and data warehouses Your knowledge of Data Lake and Big Data Architectures Your advanced working experience in data analysis, requirement analysis, test case development and technical specifications development Your experience with data normalization and denormalization techniques Your background building processes supporting data transformation, data structures, metadata, dependency and workload management. Your background supporting and working with multi-functional teams in a dynamic environment. Your solid data management and interpersonal skills Company Culture,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

P89gjsd7t6,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

wwtWmjar0N,Oasis Systems has an exciting opportunity for a Tactical Data Link (TDL) Analyst >located at Langley, AFB in Hampton, VA.
LOCATION: Langley, AFB

JOB STATUS: Full-Time

TRAVEL: N/A

REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS (Education, Certifications, Experience, Skills)

SECURITY CLEARANCE: US Secret and NATO Secret

EDUCATION:Bachelor’s degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.).

CERTIFICATIONS:

EXPERIENCE LEVEL:

OTHER QUALIFICATIONS/SKILLS:
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) in a job working formal operational and information exchange requirements development as they relate to fighter aircraft tactical data exchange.
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) in a job performing formal Multi-TDL configuration management (to include development and analysis of complex ICPs), data management, military standards management, and staff processes.
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) working with and exposure to Joint/Air Force doctrine and the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Board (C3B) and it subcommittees.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
• Develop Interface Control Proposals (ICPs) that make editorial and technical changes to current/future multi-TDL configuration items (US Military Standard (Mil-Std) 3011, 6011, 6016, 6017, 6020, MADL, Cursor on Target (CoT), etc.). Perform detailed technical analysis of ICPs as they relate to USAF platforms and systems.
• Provide technical multi-TDL expertise to support the integration of multi-TDL capabilities into USAF platforms and systems.
• Develop, or review previously-developed, bit-level implementation specifications for USAF platforms and systems. These implementations shall depict the total multi-TDL implementation requirements for the platform.
• Provide technical support at Technical Interchange Meetings and Design Reviews concerning multi-TDL implementations.
• Provide technical expertise to analyze concepts or problems with Air Force, Joint, or Coalition standards or implementation of those standards and provide solutions or recommendations in appropriate format as required.
• Support development of operational concepts and architectures that use existing and emerging capabilities in support of USAF platform/system information exchange, interoperability, and operational employment requirements. This support shall include participation in Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) and other working groups to address specific technical and operational issues.
• Provide analytical assessments addressing impacts on existing allied message standards and systems technical accuracy effect on doctrine and identification of potential problems and provide solutions and recommendations for implementation.
• Attend and provide technical support for Air Force, Joint and Coalition-related multi-TDL meetings.

Who We Are
Oasis Systems is a premier provider of customer-driven, cost-effective and quality Engineering Services; Enterprise Systems and Applications; Human Factors Engineering; Information Technology and Cyber Security; Professional Services; and Specialized Engineering Solutions to the Department of Defense, FAA, NRC and other federal agencies.
We strive to be an exciting and welcoming company that attracts, develops, motivates and retains the most talented, skilled and dedicated people in the industry; where they are encouraged to achieve personal excellence, purpose, and their full potential and career aspirations; while supporting mission-critical national security technologies and programs.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

ulv4UQi9Fq,Oasis Systems has an exciting opportunity for a USMTF Data Analyst located in Langley AFB Hampton, VA. The selected candidate will support the United States Message Text Format (USMTF) Interoperability, Integration, Analysis and Configuration Management Support to the Joint Interoperability of Tactical Command and Control Systems (JINTACCS) Program Office at Langley AFB, VA.
LOCATION: Langley AFB, VA
JOB STATUS: Full time
TRAVEL: N/A

REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS: (Education, Certifications, Experience, Skills)

SECURITY CLEARANCE: Secret and NATO Secret
EDUCATION: Bachelor’s degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.) Or an Associates degree in a technical field
CERTIFICATIONS: N/A
EXPERIENCE LEVEL: See below
OTHER QUALIFICATIONS/SKILLS:
Bachelor’s degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.).
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) in a job performing formal USMTF configuration management (to include development/analysis of complex ICPs), data management, military standards management, and requirements development (operational and information exchange).
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) working with and exposure to Joint/Air Force doctrine, Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), and the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Board (C3B) and its subcommittees.
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) working with Extensible Markup Language (XML) to include commercial tools, Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft Power Point.
OR
An Associate’s degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, information technology).
At least five (5) years recent operational experience (performed within the last 10 years) working in an Air Operations Center (AOC) or similar Tactical Command and Control (C2) system (TAOC, CRC, AWACS, etc.).
At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using USMTF messages (e.g. OPTASK LINK, ATO, ACO, etc.) in an operational environment.
At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using software systems that use character-oriented message exchanges (USMTF).
At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using and understanding MIL-STD-6040, DoD Interface Standard U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF) Description, Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), NATO Message Text Formatting System (FORMATS), and associated MTF message catalogs.
At least two (2) years recent experience (within the last 10 years) working with Extensible Markup Language (XML) to include commercially available tools (e.g. XML Spy), Microsoft Work, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft Power Point.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
Provide technical assistance and technical recommendations in the review of Joint Doctrine, Tactics Techniques and Procedures (TTP), Concepts of Operations (CONOPS), Initial Capabilities Document (ICDs), issue papers, plans, and other documents staffed through ACC/A5JI.
Support ACC/A5JI in the configuration management of MIL-STD-6040, “DoD Interface Standard U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF) Description” and Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), “NATO Message Text Formatting System (FORMATS)” and appropriate message catalogs.
Provide technical support to the Air Force voting principal at the Joint USMTF Configuration Control Board (CCB), NATO Senior Air Information Exchange Requirements (IER) Panel, and all other meetings relating to Message Text Formats. The Contractor shall attend required meetings and international forums.
Provide technical support at Air Force, Joint and combined forums and at any Joint working groups in which ACC/A5J/A5JI participates.
Provides technical support in the review and development decision for implementation of XML-MTF.
Provide technical support for operational users in translating requirements for information exchange into a Message Text Format.
Develop Interface Change Proposals (ICP) supporting Air Force Information Exchange Requirements (IER), to include formatting the IER and creating the ICP to update (MIL-STD 6040) and the message catalog.
Provide expertise in reviewing proposed MTF ICPs developed by other Services or Commands and provide technical assessments to include interoperability, integration, and implementation issues.
Provide analysis of the impacts of existing documentation on affected systems, operational procedures, or doctrine. The Contractor shall provide proposed solutions and recommendations for approval or disapproval and a recommendation for implementation of the ICP.
Develop Change Proposals (CP) supporting NATO Air IERs, to include formatting the IER and creating the CP to update Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3) and the NATO message catalog.
Provide expertise in reviewing proposed NATO MTF CPs developed by other Nations, NATO Commands or IER panels and provide technical assessments to include interoperability, integration, and implementation issues.
Provide analysis of the impacts of existing documentation on affected systems, operational procedures, or doctrine. The Contractor shall provide proposed solutions and recommendations for approval or disapproval and a recommendation for implementation of the CP.
Provide technical support in the development and review of US Guidance Packages prepared by the Air Force representative to NATO working groups.
Provide expertise in the development and harmonization of Air Operations IERs in support of combined operations.
Who We Are
Oasis Systems is a premier provider of customer-driven, cost-effective and quality Engineering Services; Enterprise Systems and Applications; Human Factors Engineering; Information Technology and Cyber Security; Professional Services; and Specialized Engineering Solutions to the Department of Defense, FAA, NRC and other federal agencies.
We strive to be an exciting and welcoming company that attracts, develops, motivates and retains the most talented, skilled and dedicated people in the industry; where they are encouraged to achieve personal excellence, purpose, and their full potential and career aspirations; while supporting mission-critical national security technologies and programs.
Oasis Systems is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate in hiring or employment on the basis of any legally protected characteristic including, but not limited to, race, color, religion, national origin, marital status, gender, sexual orientation, ancestry, age, medical condition, military veteran status or on the basis of physical handicap which, with reasonable accommodation, render the application to satisfactorily perform the job available.,Oasis Systems has an exciting opportunity for a USMTF Data Analyst located in Langley AFB Hampton, VA. The selected candidate will support the United States Message Text Format (USMTF) Interoperability, Integration, Analysis and Configuration Management Support to the Joint Interoperability of Tactical Command and Control Systems (JINTACCS) Program Office at Langley AFB, VA. Currently Oasis Systems is offering relocation/sign on bonus, for additional information contact LOCATION: Langley AFB, VA
JOB STATUS: Full time
TRAVEL: N/A REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS: (Education, Certifications, Experience, Skills) SECURITY CLEARANCE: Secret and NATO Secret EDUCATION: Bachelors degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.) Or an Associates degree in a technical field
CERTIFICATIONS: N/A
EXPERIENCE LEVEL: See below OTHER QUALIFICATIONS/SKILLS: Bachelors degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.).
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) in a job performing formal USMTF configuration management (to include development/analysis of complex ICPs), data management, military standards management, and requirements development (operational and information exchange).
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) working with and exposure to Joint/Air Force doctrine, Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), and the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Board (C3B) and its subcommittees.
At least three (3) years recent experience (within last 10 years) working with Extensible Markup Language (XML) to include commercial tools, Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft Power Point. OR
An Associates degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, information technology). At least five (5) years recent operational experience (performed within the last 10 years) working in an Air Operations Center (AOC) or similar Tactical Command and Control (C2) system (TAOC, CRC, AWACS, etc.). At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using USMTF messages (e.g. OPTASK LINK, ATO, ACO, etc.) in an operational environment. At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using software systems that use character-oriented message exchanges (USMTF). At least five (5) years recent experience (performed within the last 10 years) using and understanding MIL-STD-6040, DoD Interface Standard U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF) Description, Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), NATO Message Text Formatting System (FORMATS), and associated MTF message catalogs. At least two (2) years recent experience (within the last 10 years) working with Extensible Markup Language (XML) to include commercially available tools (e.g. XML Spy), Microsoft Work, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft Power Point. RESPONSIBILITIES: Provide technical assistance and technical recommendations in the review of Joint Doctrine, Tactics Techniques and Procedures (TTP), Concepts of Operations (CONOPS), Initial Capabilities Document (ICDs), issue papers, plans, and other documents staffed through ACC/A5JI.
Support ACC/A5JI in the configuration management of MIL-STD-6040, DoD Interface Standard U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF) Description and Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3), NATO Message Text Formatting System (FORMATS) and appropriate message catalogs.
Provide technical support to the Air Force voting principal at the Joint USMTF Configuration Control Board (CCB), NATO Senior Air Information Exchange Requirements (IER) Panel, and all other meetings relating to Message Text Formats. The Contractor shall attend required meetings and international forums.
Provide technical support at Air Force, Joint and combined forums and at any Joint working groups in which ACC/A5J/A5JI participates.
Provides technical support in the review and development decision for implementation of XML-MTF.
Provide technical support for operational users in translating requirements for information exchange into a Message Text Format.
Develop Interface Change Proposals (ICP) supporting Air Force Information Exchange Requirements (IER), to include formatting the IER and creating the ICP to update (MIL-STD 6040) and the message catalog.
Provide expertise in reviewing proposed MTF ICPs developed by other Services or Commands and provide technical assessments to include interoperability, integration, and implementation issues.
Provide analysis of the impacts of existing documentation on affected systems, operational procedures, or doctrine. The Contractor shall provide proposed solutions and recommendations for approval or disapproval and a recommendation for implementation of the ICP.
Develop Change Proposals (CP) supporting NATO Air IERs, to include formatting the IER and creating the CP to update Allied Data Publication 3 (ADatP-3) and the NATO message catalog.
Provide expertise in reviewing proposed NATO MTF CPs developed by other Nations, NATO Commands or IER panels and provide technical assessments to include interoperability, integration, and implementation issues.
Provide analysis of the impacts of existing documentation on affected systems, operational procedures, or doctrine. The Contractor shall provide proposed solutions and recommendations for approval or disapproval and a recommendation for implementation of the CP.
Provide technical support in the development and review of US Guidance Packages prepared by the Air Force representative to NATO working groups.
Provide expertise in the development and harmonization of Air Operations IERs in support of combined operations.,Oasis Systems has an exciting opportunity for a Tactical Data Link (TDL) Analyst located at Langley, AFB in Hampton, VA.
LOCATION: Langley, AFB

JOB STATUS: Full-Time

TRAVEL: N/A

REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS (Education, Certifications, Experience, Skills):

SECURITY CLEARANCE: US Secret and NATO Secret

EDUCATION:Bachelor’s degree in a technical field (such as engineering, computer science, etc.).

OTHER QUALIFICATIONS/SKILLS:
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) in a job working formal operational and information exchange requirements development as they relate to fighter aircraft tactical data exchange.
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) in a job performing formal Multi-TDL configuration management (to include development and analysis of complex ICPs), data management, military standards management, and staff processes.
• At least five (5) years recent experience (within past 10 years) working with and exposure to Joint/Air Force doctrine and the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Board (C3B) and it subcommittees.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
• Develop Interface Control Proposals (ICPs) that make editorial and technical changes to current/future multi-TDL configuration items (US Military Standard (Mil-Std) 3011, 6011, 6016, 6017, 6020, MADL, Cursor on Target (CoT), etc.). Perform detailed technical analysis of ICPs as they relate to USAF platforms and systems.
• Provide technical multi-TDL expertise to support the integration of multi-TDL capabilities into USAF platforms and systems.
• Develop, or review previously-developed, bit-level implementation specifications for USAF platforms and systems. These implementations shall depict the total multi-TDL implementation requirements for the platform.
• Provide technical support at Technical Interchange Meetings and Design Reviews concerning multi-TDL implementations.
• Provide technical expertise to analyze concepts or problems with Air Force, Joint, or Coalition standards or implementation of those standards and provide solutions or recommendations in appropriate format as required.
• Support development of operational concepts and architectures that use existing and emerging capabilities in support of USAF platform/system information exchange, interoperability, and operational employment requirements. This support shall include participation in Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) and other working groups to address specific technical and operational issues.
• Provide analytical assessments addressing impacts on existing allied message standards and systems technical accuracy effect on doctrine and identification of potential problems and provide solutions and recommendations for implementation.
• Attend and provide technical support for Air Force, Joint and Coalition-related multi-TDL meetings.


Who We Are
Oasis Systems is a premier provider of customer-driven, cost-effective and quality Engineering Services; Enterprise Systems and Applications; Human Factors Engineering; Information Technology and Cyber Security; Professional Services; and Specialized Engineering Solutions to the Department of Defense, FAA, NRC and other federal agencies.
We strive to be an exciting and welcoming company that attracts, develops, motivates and retains the most talented, skilled and dedicated people in the industry; where they are encouraged to achieve personal excellence, purpose, and their full potential and career aspirations; while supporting mission-critical national security technologies and programs.
Oasis Systems is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate in hiring or employment on the basis of any legally protected characteristic including, but not limited to, race, color, religion, national origin, marital status, gender, sexual orientation, ancestry, age, medical condition, military veteran status or on the basis of physical handicap which, with reasonable accommodation, render the application to satisfactorily perform the job available.,Business Intelligence & Data Analyst Task Description

Perform data exploration and analytics.

a. Create BI reports and dashboards.

b. Utilize Python, R, SQL, related technologies to perform artificial intelligence and machine learning on big data.

c. Gather data from various sources transpose into usable information.

d. Interpret data to draw conclusion, projections, forecasting and trend analysis using statistical techniques and related concepts.

e. Develop POAM for all projects and tasks using AGILE concepts and best practices.

f. Participate in regularly scheduled meetings to discuss projects, tasks, and requirements.

g. Provide technical advice and recommendations such as best practices on current and trending technologies on its potential use and gain for the government.

Qualiﬁcations:

Education Bachelor Degree in Computer Science or Engineering or Mathematics or Statistics.

a. Experience Six years of experience in interpreting and analyzing data for data-driven solutions, data regression models using predictive data modeling and analyzing data mining algorithms.

b. Experience and in depth knowledge of Microsoft Excel Analysis Pak, Minitab, MS SQL Analysis Services, Python and/or R in processing data for artificial intelligence and machine learning.

c. Proficiency and in-depth experience in using AGILE concepts and best practices.

d. Experience in Microsoft Windows O/S and Linux O/S

e. Experience in MS SQL, MySQL, C, C++, C#, Java, Java Script, JSON, IIS, Apache Web Server, Ruby, PHP and MySQL Experience in writing technical manuals and use guides.

f. Knowledge of current DON or DOD Information Assurance policies

Certifications:

Must maintain current CompTIA Security+ certification.

Microsoft Certified Solutions Associate (MCSA) Machine Learning Certification. MCSA certification must be one of the current published paths by Microsoft or follow-on certification with emphasis on the platform or system being supported.

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $120,000.00 - $130,000.00 per year

Experience:
Agile Methodology: 2 years (Required)
data analysis: 6 years (Required)
Education:
Bachelor's (Required)
License:
MCSA Machine Learning (Preferred)
CompTIA Security+ (Required)
Security Clearance Required:
Secret (Required)
Work Location:
One location
Benefits:
Health insurance
Dental insurance
Vision insurance
Retirement plan
Paid time off
Tuition reimbursement
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Company's website:
https://prosoft-eng.com
Work Remotely:
No,Description Universal Consulting Services, UCS, seeks candidates to become a part of a close-knit group of professionals for Service Desk careers to support the Component Enterprise Data Center (CEDC). This is an excellent opportunity to become a part of our team working for the Naval Information Warfare Center, NIWC-Atlantic Service Support Center located in Norfolk, VA. Formerly known as SPAWAR - Atlantic. This is awarded work. Priority review will be given to former or recently separating Navy Veterans, Navy Reservists or Navy Civilian employees. DOD SECRET CLEARANCE REQUIRED. The Component Enterprise Data Center supports multiple programs that will require shifting from one knowledge base to another and handling many calls dealing with a multitude of issues. * Basic troubleshooting at a Tier 1 level with the option to escalate tickets to the Tier 2 level. * In this position, you will work with a large category of different customer types that could range from a call regarding an NROTC application, to an Instructor's access to other naval systems or a Database Engineer whose server needs maintenance. * The applicant must be able to be clearly understood while also being able to translate the customer's needs. * Coordination and teamwork are a must for this position. * Although your primary area of responsibility is Component Enterprise Data Center, you will also provide support to Military Sealift Command (MSC), Information Technology Service Management, and Naval Education and Training Command (NETC) programs: CeTARS, NETFOCUS, FastData, AIM, LAS, and Electronic Training Room. This position requires the ability to answer procedural questions and escalate incidents to the correct location for processing. Position Requirements * DOD SECRET CLEARANCE REQUIRED. * Work a non-standard schedule. * Able to sit for long periods of time. * Able to acclimate to and implement new knowledge quickly. * Exhibit excellent customer service skills. Requires an experienced, detail and customer service oriented individual to support various program and applications. * Attention to detail * Possess the ability to multi-task and work in a fast paced, team-oriented environment with the ability to work with little or no supervision. * Responds to telephone calls, email, and personnel requests for technical support. * This position will require strong communication skills (verbal and written) with a focus on customer service to both our staff and external clients. * Communicate effectively with end users of various levels of military and civilian ranking. * Operate Microsoft Outlook functional inboxes. * Be able to adapt to different systems e.g. ticketing systems and NETFOCUS among others. Understand and apply basic IT Troubleshooting. * Understand and apply technical troubleshooting steps. Location Norfolk, VA Full-Time/Part-Time Full-Time Exempt/Non-Exempt Non-Exempt About the Organization Universal Consulting Services, Inc. (UCS) is a rapidly growing Government contractor known for our expertise in health and IT solutions. Our driven, passionate professionals are catalysts for improving performance across all levels of Government. We have been recognized as one of Washington Technology's FAST 50 for our tremendous success as a woman-owned business, in addition to inclusion on Inc. Magazine's 5000 list of the fastest-growing companies in America. Our clients include, but are not limited to, the Department of Defense, Department of Justice, and Department of Treasury. EOE Statement We are an equal employment opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability status, protected veteran status or any other characteristic protected by law. This position is currently accepting applications.,Universal Consulting Services, UCS, seeks candidates to become a part of a close-knit group of professionals for Service Desk careers to support the Component Enterprise Data Center (CEDC). This is an excellent opportunity to become a part of our team working for the Naval Information Warfare Center, NIWC-Atlantic Service Support Center located in Norfolk, VA. Formerly known as SPAWAR – Atlantic.

This is awarded work. Priority review will be given to former or recently separating Navy Veterans, Navy Reservists or Navy Civilian employees.

DOD SECRET CLEARANCE REQUIRED.

The Component Enterprise Data Center supports multiple programs that will require shifting from one knowledge base to another and handling many calls dealing with a multitude of issues.
Basic troubleshooting at a Tier 1 level with the option to escalate tickets to the Tier 2 level.
In this position, you will work with a large category of different customer types that could range from a call regarding an NROTC application, to an Instructor’s access to other naval systems or a Database Engineer whose server needs maintenance.
The applicant must be able to be clearly understood while also being able to translate the customer’s needs.
Coordination and teamwork are a must for this position.
Although your primary area of responsibility is Component Enterprise Data Center, you will also provide support to Military Sealift Command (MSC), Information Technology Service Management, and Naval Education and Training Command (NETC) programs: CeTARS, NETFOCUS, FastData, AIM, LAS, and Electronic Training Room. This position requires the ability to answer procedural questions and escalate incidents to the correct location for processing.
DOD SECRET CLEARANCE REQUIRED.
Work a non-standard schedule.
Able to sit for long periods of time.
Able to acclimate to and implement new knowledge quickly.
Exhibit excellent customer service skills. Requires an experienced, detail and customer service oriented individual to support various program and applications.
Attention to detail
Possess the ability to multi-task and work in a fast paced, team-oriented environment with the ability to work with little or no supervision.
Responds to telephone calls, email, and personnel requests for technical support.
This position will require strong communication skills (verbal and written) with a focus on customer service to both our staff and external clients.
Communicate effectively with end users of various levels of military and civilian ranking.
Operate Microsoft Outlook functional inboxes.
Be able to adapt to different systems e.g. ticketing systems and NETFOCUS among others. Understand and apply basic IT Troubleshooting.
Understand and apply technical troubleshooting steps.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

Mm1torioJ6,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

HkIPrIJm69,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

Rh9jJaEnLX,Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and âœcleanâ data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

3LM2Lgackr,Our client is looking to hire an experienced full-time Data
Analyst to work in their Los Angeles office.

Responsibilities:

· Analyze user behavior and translate results from data into
actionable insights that help drive business goals and improve
company performance.

· Develop and automate analytical reports for various business
units and stakeholders throughout the organization.

· Regularly present and share findings to drive new business
initiatives and content strategy.

· Monitor and analyze key metrics and execute recurring analyses
and reporting.

· Regularly analyze websites to ensure site traffic and
conversion funnels are performant and provide recommendations to
test and optimize new features and products.

· Develop and maintain strong relationships with internal teams
and provide analytical support as necessary.

Requirements & Qualifications:

· BA / BS degree in related field

· 3-5 years of experience in Business Intelligence or Analytics
space, specifically dealing with site traffic

· SQL / query language skills are a plus

· Ability to analyze large data sets, manipulate data, and make
data-driven recommendations.

· Experience managing various tagging and tracking platforms
especially Google Analytics

· Experience with the following technologies is a Plus: Hadoop,
AWS, Tableau or other OLAP cube/data visualization, Oracle
database, Adobe Marketing Cloud (Omniture), Clicktale,
ExactTarget/Salesforce (or similar ESP)

· Experience coordinating and communicating with cross-functional
teams

· Strong Critical Thinking Required

· Understanding of eCommerce and online sales attribution
methodologies a Plus

· Excellent organizational, oral and interpersonal communication
skills, and keen attention to detail.

· Strong Ability to prioritize and handle multiple
initiatives/tasks in parallel as well as changing priorities

· Experience from a Media Company or Digital Publisher Preferred,DatamanUSA LLC has an exciting opportunity for a Data AnalystÂto work onsite with one of our direct clients in Los Angeles, CA. If you are not available or not interested then we love referrals! Please refer us to your friends, family, and colleagues for this opportunity. DatamanUSA gives referral bonuses (up to $500) if they get selected and perform well for our clients. Position Title: Data Analyst Duration: 1+ Month (with possible extension) Location: Los Angeles, California Required Skills and Experience:
4+ years of work experience with data analysis, statistical analysis, and data mining in business administration, public administration, IT, or other related industry.
4+ years of work experience gathering data requirements (including functional, user, system requirements); creating application wireframes, developing process flow diagrams, writing quality technical and user guide documentation; perform heavy research; and any other analysis tasks necessary for software implementation projects.
4+ years of work experience using SQL databases and database query languages.
Extensive experience in data management, data analysis, managing large data sets, data scrubbing, and identifying and resolving data, code or scripting issues.
Intermediate to advanced knowledge of Microsoft Word, Excel, Project, and PowerPoint is required.
Intermediate to advanced knowledge of Microsoft Access and Outlook are strongly desired.,Data Analyst Location Glendale, CA Duration 3 months contract Client is looking for Data Analyst to build reports, run statistical analysis, etc.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

bf76awqnz7,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

gAmCJZSljJ,Introduction
As an IBM Application Architect, you directly help clients transform their business and solve complex problems. You will define the scope and vision for projects that deliver customized solutions using your knowledge of IBM platforms. You are a technical leader, serving as a liaison among business partners, technical resources, and project stakeholders.

Your Role and Responsibilities
IBM Services is seeking Microsoft Dynamics Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Data Analysts to collect and analyze requirements and solve client problems using Microsoft Dynamics CRM solutions. You will serve as a liaison between clients and project consultants, particularly during initial project phases. You will work primarily on project execution but may be involved in sales support as well.

Microsoft CRM Data Analysts are responsible for identifying, developing and deploying end-user solutions in CRM systems. Using your deep functional knowledge and familiarity with the Microsoft Dynamics CRM application, you will ensure that client business requirements are met while providing a variety of advisory services around project management, business process development, implementation support and end-user training.
Primary Responsibilities:
Project Execution
Support the translation of client business requirements into CRM solutions, including requirements approval, communication, traceability and reuse
Contribute to the transfer of functional requirements to development and test teams
Use CRM workflow technology to automate business processes
Stay abreast on updates and new releases in CRM technologies (Microsofts and its competitors)
Educate end-users on CRM functions
Provide end user classroom training on the configured CRM application before go-live and individual training during hyper-support after the cut-over
Sales Support

•Help determine and translate customer needs into a solution and approach
•Contribute to proposal development
•Contribute to scope, approach, and estimating input to the proposal team
•Contribute to and participate in client demonstrations and presentations

Additional skills required:
Microsoft Office Suite, specifically Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Visio
Microsoft DevOps
Familiarity with Microsoft technologies/trends
Strong analytical, presentation, and writing skills
Skills and experience in creating and delivering production demonstrations is preferred but not required.

NOTE: Microsoft Dynamics CRM experience is required for this position

Required Technical and Professional Expertise
At least 3 years team lead experience or management experience of 5+ team members (management consultant only)
At least 2 years project experience in enterprise business application development and delivery (e.g., CRM, ERP, SCM, HCM)
At least 1 year project implementation experience using Microsoft Dynamics 365, Microsoft Dynamics CRM online, or Microsoft Dynamics CRM 2016, 2015, or 2013
At least 2 years project experience translating client business needs into software capabilities
At least 2 years project experience with business requirements analysis and modeling
At least 2 years project experience creating functional designs, test conditions and test scripts
At least 2 years experience working within a team environment
Basic knowledge of software development methodologies (Waterfall and/or Agile)
Preferred Technical and Professional Expertise
At least 2 years consulting experience working for a global systems integrator
Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP)
At least 1 year project experience working with global and offshore project teams
At least 1 year experience with system integration or user acceptance testing
At least 1 year experience with organizational design
At least 1 year experience with business process design or re-engineering
At least 1 year experience with developing and implementing end-user training programs
At least 1 year experience implementing or using CRM systems to support customer service, call center, or field service operations
About Business Unit
IBM Services is a team of business, strategy and technology consultants that design, build, and run foundational systems and services that is the backbone of the world's economy. IBM Services partners with the world's leading companies in over 170 countries to build smarter businesses by reimagining and reinventing through technology, with its outcome-focused methodologies, industry-leading portfolio and world class research and operations expertise leading to results-driven innovation and enduring excellence.

Your Life @ IBM
What matters to you when youre looking for your next career challenge?

Maybe you want to get involved in work that really changes the world? What about somewhere with incredible and diverse career and development opportunities where you can truly discover your passion? Are you looking for a culture of openness, collaboration and trust where everyone has a voice? What about all of these? If so, then IBM could be your next career challenge. Join us, not to do something better, but to attempt things you never thought possible.

Impact. Inclusion. Infinite Experiences. Do your best work ever.

About IBM
IBMs greatest invention is the IBMer. We believe that progress is made through progressive thinking, progressive leadership, progressive policy and progressive action. IBMers believe that the application of intelligence, reason and science can improve business, society and the human condition. Restlessly reinventing since 1911, we are the largest technology and consulting employer in the world, with more than 380,000 IBMers serving clients in 170 countries.

Location Statement
For additional information about location requirements, please discuss with the recruiter following submission of your application.

Being You @ IBM
IBM is committed to creating a diverse environment and is proud to be an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, national origin, genetics, disability, age, or veteran status. IBM is also committed to compliance with all fair employment practices regarding citizenship and immigration status.,Job Description
Data Intelligence Analyst

Job Responsibilities

• Triages intake of data requests and seeks understanding of business need.

• Applies knowledge of healthcare and critical thinking skills in the analysis of business request and makes recommendations for solution/s to solve challenges.

• Provides moderately complex to complex report and data analysis with the help of more senior team members, vendors, and/or other IS department contacts.

• Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers.

• Works closely with application teams to understand workflow, documentation standards and potential gaps. Makes recommendations for closing gaps.

• Gathers clear and concise requirements for basic to medium complexity requests, interprets the findings and translates the information into a documented business specification for report development.

• Documents specifications in an organized manner, demonstrate knowledge of understanding request, tools that can be applied and developed to present to the requestor.

• Works closely with report developers (including Enterprise Data Warehouse and other reporting teams) to ensure understanding of data models and design of output.

• Performs data scrubbing, troubleshooting and quality checking prior to delivery of results.

• Demonstrates collaboration across application areas and work groups. Must demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.

• Proactively communicates with project management to prioritize workload and potential risks or delays. Tracks issues and provides solution-oriented escalation to project leadership.

• May be independently responsible for completing tasks/assignments depending on size of project, including status reporting, requirement gathering, project scoping, vendor research, project planning, documentation, resources planning, and impact analysis. Demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.

• Manages low to medium complexity projects. Collaborates with team members as needed.

• Performs working level process and requirement analysis, including process mapping though current flow charts, documents, future needs/plans, requirement elicitation, stakeholder analysis, and specification gathering in support of team projects and small/medium managed projects.

• Demonstrates a strong understanding of report analysis and development and applies expertise to help meet customer goals and outcomes.

• Provides quantitative and qualitative data analysis and reporting of patterns, insights, and trends to decision-makers.

• May be independently responsible for completing tasks/assignments depending on size of project, including but not limited to status reporting, requirement gathering, project scoping, vendor research, project planning, documentation, resources planning, and impact analysis. Must demonstrate a working understanding of fundamental project management methodologies and components of project life cycle.

• Manages low to medium complexity projects. Collaborates with team members as needed.

• Demonstrates a strong understanding of report analysis and development and applies expertise to help meet customer goals and outcomes.

• Trains end-users and staff as necessary.

• Develops to demonstrate a strong understanding of build concepts, Epic migration paths, change control process/governance and ticket management process.

• May serve as the central point of contact for smaller/medium complex projects. May independently work with external vendors in support of team projects, as well as resolving new issues, and coordinating patches/upgrades within assigned areas.

• Demonstrates collaboration across project borders with other teams. Thinks outside the box and proposes practical solutions to issues. Provides oversight and project management to assigned tasks.

• May contribute to strategy discussions by identifying options with associated pros and cons with team member.

Teamwork/Customer Relation Responsibilities

• Collaborates to problem solve and make decisions to achieve desired outcomes

• Establishes effective working relationships with cross-functional team(s)

• Cultivates and maintains strong customer relationships and rapport with stakeholders and/or client groups,Job Description
Our client in the Los Angeles area is looking for a Data Analyst for their Database / Data Warehousing projects. Experience in hospital/healthcare domain, a plus. This is a contract-to-hire opportunity. No sponsorship offered at the moment.

Required Skills:
8+ years data analysis experience
Worked as a Data Analyst on Database / Data Warehousing projects
Strong SQL skills – a must
Healthcare domain / expertise (providers and hospitals)
Strong business analysis and documentation skills
Experience with data mapping / data profiling / data analysis
Responsibilities:
Gather and analyze business requirements
Formulate requirements for databases to be developed by the developers
Write functional and design specs
Design simple to moderately complex data models
Test and validate reports, ETL / DW
Provide support and monitor client-server applications and reporting environments
Create estimates for project plans
Location: Los Angeles, CA

Duration: 3-6 months Contract-to-Hire,Meet REVOLVE:

REVOLVE is the next-generation fashion retailer for Millennial and Generation Z consumers. As a trusted, premium lifestyle brand, and a go-to online source for discovery and inspiration, we deliver an engaging customer experience from a vast yet curated offering totaling over 45,000 apparel, footwear, accessories and beauty styles. Our dynamic platform connects a deeply engaged community of millions of consumers, thousands of global fashion influencers, and more than 500 emerging, established and owned brands. Through 16 years of continued investment in technology, data analytics, and innovative marketing and merchandising strategies, we have built a powerful platform and brand that we believe is connecting with the next generation of consumers and is redefining fashion retail for the 21st century. For more information please visitwww.revolve.com.

At REVOLVE the most successful team members have a thirst and the creativity to make this the top e-commerce brand in the world. With a team of 1,000+ based out of Cerritos, California we are a dynamic bunch that are motivated by getting the company to the next level. Its our goal to hire high-energy, diverse, bright, creative, and flexible individuals who thrive in a fast-paced work environment. In return, we promise to keep REVOLVE a company where inspired people will always thrive.

Some of the sweetest perks we offer arent in a typical benefit package like hefty discount on items we carry as in 50% or more off retail prices, free weekly lunches, and pretty rad company parties.

To take a behind the scenes look at the REVOLVE corporate lifestyle check out our Instagram @REVOLVEcareers or #lifeatrevolve.

Main purpose of the position:

The Data Intelligence Analyst plays a critical role in actively building, upgrading, and maintaining the data-centric nucleus of the Buying and Merchandising arm of REVOLVE headquarters. This position partners with a multitude of end-users ranging the spectrum all the way from Buyers up to Executives in order to keep us on the cutting edge of Fashion Retail by developing world class proprietary tools and internal processes.

The Data Intelligence Analysts primary objective is to support the Buying and Planning arm of the company in order to ensure that shrewd inventory purchasing and manufacturing decisions are consistently being made day-in and day-out so as to keep fueling our aggressive top-line growth trajectory while continuing to push the limits of our bottom-line profitability. We are a data-driven, metrics-oriented culture and lean heavily on our Data Intelligence team to be the first line of defense in ensuring that we continue driving the business forward and maximizing opportunities, all while minimizing risk by leveraging deep data analytics.

The ideal candidate for the Data Intelligence Analyst position should measure high on the scale for intellectual curiosity, ingenuity, and results. Our analysts pride themselves on being out of the box thinkers who can collaborate well with a diverse range of input, feedback, and experience to consistently raise the bar and deliver results well above and beyond expectations. We are looking for candidates who are eager to make an impact and willing to go that extra mile. It is in our teams DNA to work hard and play harder.

Position responsibilities and daily tasks:
Build, Extract, and Data Mine a variety of large data sets to identify trends, gaps, and opportunities in order to produce predictive insights and action items to move the business forward
Design and Execute experiments to produce proof of concept in order to help prioritize resource investments, recommend next steps, etc
Examine business practices and Develop predictive tools and reporting to support inventory purchasing, design, and manufacturing decision-making
Design and Implement normalized data models
Develop, Test, and Implement new business metrics
Continually Improve existing processes with automation, new technology, key insights, best practices
Collaborate with analysts, data engineers, project managers, and subject matter experts to deliver impactful solutions and processes for new organizational initiatives
Multi-task a steady flow of incoming and concurrent projects and priorities ranging from high- visibility executive needs to adhoc requests from internal customers
Engage with business leaders, end users, and team members to develop deep understanding of the business and its needs
What does a candidate need to demonstrate to perform this job successfully:
Advanced math skills, with deep knowledge and understanding of numerical and statistical methods
Advanced understanding of relational database concepts
Expertise in SQL while being comfortable in an additional data programming language (such as Python)
Advanced skills with stored procedures, functions, expressions, views
Advanced proficiency with Microsoft Excel, VBA and Userform development
Data-mining skill, and expertise in visualizing and manipulating big datasets
Aptitude for understanding business environment and translating business requirements to technical solutions
Strong problem-solving skills to propose multiple solutions, properly weigh tradeoffs and ROI, identify the best path forward, and exercise good judgment to drive ahead
Comfort interacting and collaborating with people across all levels of the organization while fielding questions as a true Subject Matter Expert
Ability to articulate thoughts and findings both orally and in writing
Agile development mindset, understanding and appreciating the benefit of constant iteration and improvement
Ability to manage multiple projects simultaneously and to keep abreast of current and future technology and trends
Ability to manage time effectively, set priorities, and meet deadlines
Strong attention to detail
Minimum candidate qualifications (years of experience, education level, technical skills, software, etc):
A minimum of 2 to 5 years of quantitative analytical experience with a proven track record of achieving successful results from data-mining large databases
Advanced experience with designing and building spreadsheet models
SQL and PL/SQL
Excel
Bachelor's or Master's degree required,Job Description

Do you enjoy solving puzzles? Are you a person who is determined to balance your checkbook down to the last penny? We are looking for a detail-oriented Data Entry Clerk and Analyst to assist with daily data entry and analysis activities and other related tasks.

Summary: The Data Entry Clerk/Analyst enters data into various Excel spreadsheets and other databases to ensure the timely processing of client invoices and cash flow reports. They will use business acumen and critical thinking to ensure that employee billable hours are accounted for on all outgoing invoices. They will also ensure that equipment and other products sent to clients are accounted for and billed appropriately.

Job Description

Responsibilities
Timely and Accurately receives, gathers, analyzes, organizes and enters information from multiple sources.
Ensures completeness of received information and reconciles inconsistencies.
Accurately enters required data into one or more databases, documents, or spreadsheets.
Prepares invoices for approval with appropriate backup data.
Establishes and maintains physical files.
Keeps track of case file status in order to ensure compliance with established deadlines.
Coordinates requests for additional information as needed.
Selects relevant information from a variety of sources in order to prepare invoices, documents, reports, summaries, and replies to inquiries, ensuring accuracy and proper format of the information provided.
Performs word processing relevant to situation.
Provides accurate and timely status updates.
Performs other duties as assigned.
Qualifications

· Ability to grasp and understand the organization and functions of internal departments
Meticulous data entry skills
Excellent communication skills; oral and written
Competence to review, interpret, and evaluate documents
Attention to detail and the ability to read and follow directions is extremely important
Strong organizational and prioritization skills
Experience with the Microsoft Office suite of applications (Excel, PowerPoint, Word) and other common software applications, to include databases, intermediate skills preferred
Proven commitment and competence to provide excellent customer service; positive and flexible
Ability to work in a team environment and maintain a professional disposition
OTHER REQUIREMENTS:

Business acumen Relevant work experience (1-3 years). Understands how a business operates financially.

Capable of using contemporary technology and software for communications and financial management. Proficient in appropriate software: Excel, Access, Word. Accounting software experience with Xero, or Quickbooks.

Communication is a key factor. Must be able to read, write and speak English clearly. Use of telephone, email, instant messaging and personal interfacing will be required at a high level. MS Word, Outlook email/calendar experience and Smart phone usage will be required.

Time Management and the ability to meet deadlines, create reports and financial statements and ad hoc reports as needed.

Customer Service oriented. Must have excellent skills in dealing with clients, vendors, bankers, auditors and internal personnel. Understanding their priorities, negotiating time schedules and being able to discern actual requirements accurately.

Qualifications

Detail oriented. Investigator. Responsible. Logical. Analytical. Strategic

Communicator. Must be able to gather financial data into easily understandable formats. Can deal effectively with both external and internal personnel in areas of finance

Well organized Multi-tasker. Must have, or be able to develop, a systematic method of conducting business involving multiple tasks and ability to recall the information quickly. Keeps meticulous records. Energetic, logical and focused.

Open-minded and flexible. Able to grasp ideas and concepts and turn them into workable solutions. Capable of following directions to exact detail.

Additional Information

· Local candidates only. No agencies or third parties.

· Pay commensurate with experience and local market. ($18 - $25 / hour)

· Full benefits package - Medical, Dental, Vision, Life insurance, 401k, Tuition Assistance and employee discounts.

· All your information will be kept confidential according to EEO guidelines and CCPA

· ITP is an Equal Opportunity Employer.,Senior AWS Developer

UST Global is looking for a highly energetic and collaborative AWS developer who
Possesses extensive business analyst skills with experience of working projects in both Agile SAFe and Waterfall methodologies. Possesses expertise in handling cross vendor client teams across different geographic locations. End to end project management encompassing all project lifecycle stages including conceptualization, initiation, execution and closure. The candidate should be a proven self starter with demonstrated ability to make decisions and accept responsibility and risk. Excellent written and verbal communication skills with the ability to collaborate effectively with domain experts and IT leadership team is key to be successful in this role.

Representative Duties and Tasks
Configures, and administers Amazon Web Services AWS cloud computing technologies, infrastructure, and applications to meet the organizations requirements.
Assists and supports the design, deployment, management, and operation of scalable, highly available, and fault tolerant systems in the AWS cloud by working directly with the stakeholders.
Lead and perform the installation and configuration of AWS cloud management applications by leading medium to large sized efforts.
Develops, and designs software automation and scripts to orchestrate AWS cloud and virtualization technologies with defined scope, schedule and expectations.
Views and analyzes summary data on AWS cloud resource deployment and takes appropriate action.
Monitors requests and key metrics for AWS cloud resources, as well as the performance of systems in the cloud and directs remediation.
Troubleshoots issues and plans for future AWS cloud capacity requirements. Develops roadmap and business case for capacity growth.
Identifies, manages and resolves AWS cloud computing security risks and implements best practices as applied within a cloud environment.
Provides subject matter expert technical support to customers using AWS products, solutions and APIs.
Identifies and documents product bugs and feature requests and works with internal support teams, external providers, as well as customers to implement effective solutions.
Supports and leads the evaluation of new service offerings from AWS to determine potential usage by GDMS.
May provide work direction to other employees as a technical lead
Knowledge Skills and Abilities
Proficient understanding of the AWS platform
Proficient understanding of AWS service offerings
Proficient understanding of virtualization technologies Server, Storage, Networking
Proficient understanding of computer programming languages C, C Sharp, C , Perl, PHP, and Python.
Proficient understanding with scripting languages, and software and infrastructure automation skills
Detailed and fully proficient knowledge of technology trends and champions new ideas and product and process improvements.
Strong understanding of security, risk and compliance frameworks, disaster recovery, high availability architectures, hardware, operating systems and networking connectivity.
Experience creating templates with CloudFormation, and similar technologies.
Shows initiative on assignments, and professionally executes projects with very little direction, or can provide direction and leadership to technical teams.
Fully proficient ability to handle significant responsibility, leadership and accountability while executing complex assignments.
Effective communication skills written and verbal .
Knowledge of systems architecture.
Able to accept integrate constructive feedback
Proficient ability to work collaboratively and effectively with a wide range of individuals
Proficient ability to learn and apply GDMS culture, policies and processes
Location This position can be based in Chicago,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

YYRBeQ7mWN,Role: Data Analyst
Location: Chicago, IL(Local Only)
Job Type: Permanent / Fulltime

Roles and responsibilities:
Data Analysts with expertise in Python for data analysis is a must
Cloud Experience Setting up AWS, Google Cloud
Experience with Google BigQuery, Apache Spark, Hadoop, Hive, and other Big Data technologies,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

U0e4rhpoqh,Title Provider Analytics Data Analyst Mandatory skills Teradata, visualization tools, ETL, Extract, transform, load, SSIS, Master Data Management, MDM, SQL, R, Python, automation, project management, health care data statistical analysis, ETL systems, Microsoft Office, Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint, Relational Database, Teradata, Microsoft SQL, Oracle, business requirements, technical solutions, technical requirements, technical architecture Description Provider Analytics Data Analyst bull This role requires a unique blend of deep technical ability with regards to database skills, ETL systems and excellent visualization skills especially in Tableau, coupled with end customer white glove treatment. bull Co-creation, definition delivery of major strategic projects will be the norm. bull The role requires a highly resourceful individual with strong customer presence, self-motivation, and strong technical skills. Essential Duties and Responsibilities Essential functions for this job include but is not limited to bull Develop complex SQL Queries bull Design and delivery of large-scale, high-performance data transformation and storage systems such as ETL using SSIS bull Design and delivery of Analytics. Extract, transform and load with Teradata fastload bull Work heavily with Tableau and other visualization tools bull Develop technical requirements based on business requirements bull Define and manage the full development lifecycle to meet client needs bull Willing to translate business requirements into technical architectures Minimum Skills and Competencies The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill andor ability required. bull Bachelor Degree. bull 4+ years of demonstrated advance proficiency in SQL development methodologies, R and Python bull Strong background in Relational Databases (Teradata, Microsoft SQL, Oracle) and strong ETL (Microsoft SSIS) experience bull Experienced with automation in Python andor R bull Must possess effective verbal and written communication skills bull Excellent consulting skills and the ability to work effectively with clients and team members bull Ability to translate business requirements into technical solutions bull Proficient in Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint) bull 4-6 year experience using Tableau bull 4-6 year experience using SSIS Desired Skills bull MBA, Master Data Management (MDM), MS in Computer Science or Information Systems, or other advanced technical degree bull Extensive knowledge in Tableau and ETL in SSIS bull Extensive knowledge in Tableau, R, Python and ETL in SSIS and other analytical tools bull Health Insurance industry experience bull Experience with project management Required Qualification 3 years experience in health care data statistical analysis VIVA USA is an equal opportunity employer and is committed to maintaining a professional working environment that is free from discrimination and unlawful harassment. The Management, contractors, and staff of VIVA USA shall respect others without regard to race, sex, religion, age, color, creed, national or ethnic origin, physical, mental or sensory disability, marital status, sexual orientation, or status as a Vietnam-era, recently separated veteran, Active war time or campaign badge veteran, Armed forces service medal veteran, or disabled veteran. Please contact us at hrviva-it.com for any complaints, comments and suggestions. Contact Details Please send your resumes to "staffing10viva-it.com" and one of our recruiter will get in touch with you. VIVA USA INC. 3601 Algonquin Road, Suite 425 Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 staffing10viva-it.com httpwww.viva-it.com,As our Senior Data Analyst, on our data science team, you will get the opportunity to build statistical models, drive actionable insights, and tackle high-impact business problems. You will tell the story behind your insights – painting a picture to our cross-functional partners, explaining what the numbers are telling us, and recommending new ways our data can support multiple teams and our Company as a whole. A particular focus of your work will be on measuring methodologies to project and balance panel data to accurately represent purchase behavior.

As a Senior Data Analyst, you are passionate about using data to drive insights and optimizations that create better connections for our customers and that improves Numerator’s business results and success. You will not only have strong technical abilities to retrieve, manipulate, analyze, and visualize data but also excellent communication capabilities to stakeholders of all levels and skills. You will thrive in a highly autonomous and collaborative environment.

If you are seeking an environment where you get to do meaningful work with a great data science team, then we want to hear from you!

What you get to do
Define and regularly monitor KPIs, success metrics, and other analytics to maximize our control for all aspects of our data pipeline and performance.
Identify areas of analytic opportunity within Numerator and work with great focus to implement our vision.
Provide regular analysis and insights that influence our business strategy and operational plans
Partner with Product, Data, and Engineering teams to identify, investigate, and deliver solutions related to product and back-end data issues.
Support Senior Manager and broader team in developing business cases for growth opportunities across Numerator’s business.
Analyze industry trends, competitive landscape, and internal performance, and report these findings to the leadership team.
Regularly communicate outcomes, new initiatives, and improvements to stakeholders.
Create and manage processes to deliver high-quality data through scorecards and data feeds.
What You Bring
3+ years of industry experience with granular data analysis, predictive analytics, or analytics technology products.
1+ years of experience in a senior role or leading data analytic position where you had to execute the creation and proposal of technical/business solutions.
Hands-on experience reading/writing code as a Data Engineer, Technical Data Analyst or Data Scientist.
Fluency in SQL or other similar programming languages. Some development experience in at least one scripting language (Python, R, etc.).
Experience with data visualization and tools such as Looker, Mode, Periscope, Tableau, etc.
Experience launching internal metric dashboards and scorecards.
You are a data-storyteller who is comfortable communicating results in a crisp and effective manner to all audiences (technical and non-technical).
Strong analytical skills and can evangelize the use of data for sound decision making across functions.
Strong oral and written communication skills, and ability to collaborate with, and influence cross-functional partners.
Self-motivated, self-directed, and able to thrive in a fast-paced environment in an industry that constantly changes.
A mindset of designing for the future but building for now.
An eagerness to learn from others and help others grow with you.
A love of data and finding interesting questions to ask of it.
Nice to Haves
Previous experience working with purchase panel data and/or survey responses.
Proficiency in at least one statistics/data analysis packages, such as Python or R.
Experience working with marketing insights, shopping data or in the retail industry.
Experience with understanding, analyzing and modeling user data and granular behavioral trends.
Exposure to machine learning frameworks and methods.
What we offer
An inclusive and collaborative company culture- we work in an open environment while working together to get things done, and adapt to the changing needs as they come.
Market competitive total compensation package.
An opportunity to have an impact in a technologically data driven company.
Volunteer time off and charitable donation matching.
Strong support for career growth, including mentorship programs, leadership training, access to conferences and employee resource groups.
Great benefits package including health/vision/dental, unlimited PTO, flexible schedule, 401K matching, travel reimbursement and more.
If this sounds like something you would like to be part of, we'd love for you to apply! Don't worry if you think that you don't meet all the qualifications here. The tools, technologies, and methodologies we use are constantly changing and we value talent and interest over specific experience.


We are an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.,Data Analyst #411045Job Description:

If you are looking for a company where you can change a life, make a dream come true, and light the way for a better tomorrow, our company is the place where you can shine. We offer a different kind of work culture. A high standard of ethics is mandatory. Quality is our pledge. Diversity is valued. Individual initiative is rewarded. Our company offers an environment where our employees can make a real difference.

The Database Analyst provides expertise in the querying of each database used by RWE Analytics team as part of the project feasibility and/or execution using real-world databases (e.g,EMR, claims, etc.) across entire value chain geographic footprint and therapeutic areas.

The deliverables of the Database Analyst are an integral part of the analytics mission and requires expertise in creation, quality control and maintenance of efficient and rapid queries typically via SQL and SAS; as well as supporting the development and optimization of the database structures of real-world data sets.

The Database Analyst will be able to:

• Recognize issues as they generate and execute queries on existing databases
• Build cohorts and create descriptive analysis summaries in support of requests
• Collaborate with colleagues to address these issues with minimal direction
• Work closely with an RWI Medical Coder to obtain appropriate drug, disease, and procedure codes in the creation of the queries

Additional Info:

At Fast Switch Great Lakes (FSGL), Our Purpose is Our People and Our Planet. We come to work each day and are reminded we are helping people find their success stories. Isnt that cool? Also, Doing the right thing is our mantra. We act responsibly, give back to the communities we serve, and have a little fun along the way.
We at FSGL, have been doing this for 22 years with pride, dedication and plain old-fashioned hard work.
We're a financially strong, privately-held company that is 100% consultant and client focused.
We've differentiated ourselves by being fast, flexible, creative and honest. Throw out everything you've heard, seen, or felt about every other IT Consulting company. We do unique things, and we do them for Fortune 10 companies, Inc. 500 companies, and technology start-ups.
Our benefits are second to none and thanks to our flexible benefit options you can choose just the benefits that you need or want, options include:

• Medical and Dental (Fast Switch pays majority of the medical program)
• Vision
• Personal Time Off (PTO) Program
• Long Term Disability (100% paid)
• Life Insurance (100% paid)
• 401(k) with immediate vesting and 3% (of salary) dollar-for-dollar match

Plus, we have a lucrative employee referral program and an employee recognition culture.
One of our pride points as that in 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019, Fast Switch was named one of the Top Work Places in Michigan by the Detroit Free Press.
To view all of our open positions, please go to: https://clientapps.jobadder.com/45103/fast-switch
Follow us on Twitter at: https://twitter.com/FastSwitchGL
Follow us on Instagram at: https://www.instagram.com/fastswitchgl/
Find us on LinkedIn at: https://www.linkedin.com/company/fast-switch-great-lakes
And you can become a fan of Fast Switch on Facebook at: https://tinyurl.com/v4p9yy7

Job Requirements:,Required Skills : Python, SQL, AWS, SAS, Mainframes, JCL

Job Description:

Python & AWS

SAS Mainframe experience

Call Notes:

Team:

Migrating off legacy system to cloud

Some partners still on mainframe and this team supports any issues from data perspective

Role:

Pulling data and performing analysis and reporting

Skills:

Mainframe, SAS preferred over Cobol, and JCL, SQL

Python and SQL

AWS is a strong plus.

Responsible for the design, development and administration of transactional and analytical data constructs/structures. Included within those responsibilities are the areas of data access and delivery technologies. Includes expertise in data quality, data organization, metadata, and data profiling. May provide technical support on data warehouse teams. Data set sizes are usually huge (in excess of hundreds of millions of records). Demonstrated ability to move from one sequential assignment to the next (work environment and priorities can change quickly depending on business needs).

Demonstrated ability to move data between production systems and across multiple platforms

5+ years’ experience with Financial Services clients

Experience with major querying tools desired

Coordinating others work while involved with multiple work streams

Desired:

Common skill sets – Oracle, VB and UNIX 5+ years’ experience

OLAP/SQL Tools 5+ yrs experience with MVS, Teradata, SAS, Brio or comparable

Hyperion desired

Ability to communicate strategies and processes around data modeling and architecture to cross functional groups and senior levels

Ability to influence multiple levels on highly technical issues and challenges.,We seek a research programmer/analyst with very strong command of SAS, including use of data steps to merge multiple datasets from different sources to create new working databases. In addition to 2-3 years of current SAS programming experience, other desirable skills include: working knowledge of SQL; experience with other statistical software packages (e.g., SPSS, MPLUS), experience working with large data sets; experience creating and administering web-based surveys, experience working on multiple projects simultaneously. The ideal candidate will have a background in health services research or public health with graduate-level training in research methods and statistics. Major responsibilities include:
Creating and maintaining project databases from multiple primary and/or secondary sources.
Developing data management protocols to ensure quality and accessibility.
Taking the initiative to identify and understand documentation for existing complex corporate databases using both web-based resources and direct interpersonal contact.
Working with the appropriate statistical techniques needed to analyze study data and test hypotheses.
Executing data analyses, primarily in SAS.
Preparing graphic, tabular and written summaries of results of statistical analyses for internal project meetings, reports, grant applications, and papers submitted for publications.
Preparing feedback reports for distribution to medical centers and other administrative units that participate in research studies.
Interacting professionally with senior and junior colleagues throughout the organization as needed to accomplish project goals. Excellent communication skills, organizational skills, creativity, teamwork skills and attention to detail are required.
Experience in Mainframe is preferred,Overview

Top Skills:

1. Experience using complex SQL based queries to create data views procedures

2. Experience in both MS SQL Server and IBM DB2 environments

3. Data Mart experience

4. Analyze data contained in the database to confirm data accuracy and integrity of the various reports

*This is a techno functional role (70% - 30%)

*Experience with reporting tools like Tableau and Cognos would be a plus but not required

Important Information:

- The client is looking to interview immediately.

- Relocation to Chicago required.

- The role sits in downtown Chicago.

- C2C is permitted.

- $47-50/hr to the vendor.

- Phone screen, followed by an in-person interview.

TEKsystems has current consultants on this team, so we are best positioned to prepare your candidate for an interview and ultimately get them the job.

Please send resumes and references as quickly as possible.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

3DASEIMILJ,Job Description:

Synch-Solutions is in search of a SAS Analyst/Reports Writer to assist in the creation of accountability metrics and reporting as well as improve data sources, data processes, and data reporting. The ideal contractor would have detailed knowledge of K-12 data systems and, student standardized assessment data, programming experience in SAS Enterprise Guide, and have experience working in large urban K-12 school districts.

Job Qualifications:
3+ years of experience with SAS, as a data analyst and/or report writer
Experience working in K-12 school districts
Experience with data quality, data processes, and data reporting
Bachelor's Degree
Job Responsibilities:
Work with team on a project to calculate Graduation and Drop Out Rate data for use in SQRP and public reporting at multiple levels of analysis
Conduct analyses, as applicable, at each level of the analysis
Work with various departments to identify and propose recommendations to resolve issues in the Student Information System or other processes that may affect data quality
Maintain and run the analysis and work with staff from the Department of School Quality Measurement and Research Team (SQMR) to ensure that SQMR has the necessary data files and documentation at the conclusion of the project
Work with a team on a project to submit data for an education-related project. The team will support SQMR in the planning and management of the Office of Civil Rights-Civil Rights Data Collection
Work with the Department of Student Assessment, ITS, and Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) to ensure that CPS has accurate student-level data for ISBE administered assessments and Saturday SATs
Creation of Graduation and Dropout Rate datasets
Public report of Graduation and Dropout Rates
Creation of IAR and ISA and DLM datasets
Create a Project Plan for the Office of Civil Rights data collection and coordinate with OCR Staff
Submission of Enrollment and Retention data for OCR-CRDC
Draft proposal for district tracking of progress toward graduation requirements
Identification of key areas of district improvement for graduation rate,Below skills are Mandatory.
Expertise in Manual, Unix, PL/SQL, Oracle with store procedures, views, packages, Quality Center, Jira
Automation python scripting is plus

Title: QA Analyst
Location: Chicago, IL
Role: Fulltime
Salary: 85 to 90k + Benefits.

Inviting applications for the role of QA Analyst
Skillset (Must have)
Expertise in Manual, Unix, PL/SQL, Oracle with store procedures, views, packages, Quality Center, Jira
Automation python scripting is plus

Responsibilities ;
Test Validations on following regular changes in
Stored Procedure
Packages that include multiple Stored procedures
VIEWS
DATA across tables that feed into target tables
Defined Methods in Stored proc
Defined Functions
Creation of Build , testing of Builds and deployment of the same to various respective environments
UC4 Job execution and creation , BL Package creation, testing.
Maintain regression testcase using Quality Center
Various Processes testing based on UNIX machines.
JSON data File validations
XML Data File validations
Creation and review of testcases
Organize Testcase review meeting for owned tickets with proper audience and get signoff
Higher Environments validations on the respective changes,Job Title: Data Analyst Alteryx Experience MUST
Location: Chicago IL 60601
Duration: 12 Months

Certification Required: Alteryx Development & Certification
Job Description:
The Business Analyst will gain experience and knowledge of multiple company Process Models such as; Customer Service, Demand Planning, Integrated Business Planning, Logistics, Manufacturing, Procurement, Supply Planning, Financial Accounting, Sales and Master Data.
This unique role has split responsibilities that include managing information as an asset and project management responsibilities for strategies across the enterprise. This role will build upon their technical knowledge of business intelligence tools, enterprise data, and processes while developing functional leadership skills by managing projects simultaneously.
This role will interface with business stakeholders, functional and technical subject matter experts, and Project Manager. Must be a highly motivated individual with a understanding of enterprise systems and is passionate about turning data into an asset for the organization.
Roles & Responsibilities:
Collaborate in a team dynamic creating and delivery solutions to business needs that measure performance and provide analytical support to the organization
Provide troubleshooting and backup support to reporting specialist role for ongoing tasks
Collaborates with GPE's on usage of information to avoid waste
Play role in leading small to medium sized Projects across KPM's
Facilitate/assist in the discussion of project scopes, business requirements, goals, tasks and resource (people and cost) requirements
Position understands enterprise wide processes and makes appropriate recommendations to Business Partners, ultimately delivering Information as an Asset
Responsible for weekly Project Status's and delivering Continuous Improvement
Enable best practice sharing by ensuring all projects are properly closed out and key learning's are documented
Ensure SAP standard reporting is utilized where ever possible.
Develops new program specifications to support specific customer needs and system upgrades, including new releases and resolves problems with current systems.
Analyzes service requests to determine feasibility, extent of changes, resource requirements and project time estimates. Provides daily production support, including maintenance of routine production control parameters, completion of routine service requests and research problems
Required Qualification:
Associates degree
Required Experience:
Must have minimum of 1-3 Year Alteryx Development & Certification.
1-3 Years of Experience Supports changes and enhancements from development through production; recommending and implementing system enhancements (e.g., screen appearance, report distribution and setup testing)
Preferred Experience:
Minimum 2-3 years of experience in Analytics
Strong knowledge of SAP and Microsoft Office suite (particularly Excel/Access) required
Demonstrated problem solver with systems savvy
MBA/APICS/Lean/6 Sigma experience preferred, strong desire for continuing education
Required Skills:
Strong collaboration, interpersonal, teamwork and communication skills
Demonstrated problem solver with systems savvy
Preferred Skills:
Passion for analytics.
About our Company: -

22nd Century Technologies is a business enterprise that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Its journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century technologies supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions. With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Technologies is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Data Analysts, Stafford, TX: Analyze, architect, design & dev data warehouse & BI Reporting solutions using Microsoft BI Stack including SQL Server, Oracle, SSIS, SSRS, SSAS(MDX & DAX) and Power BI. Convert functional reqs to high & low level design documents. Bach degree or foreign equiv degree in Info Sys, Comp Sci or related+ 24 mos rel exp. 2 years of experience developing data warehousing, BI projects, w/Power BI, in SSPS Statistics & Rapid Minor. Microsoft SQL Server Certification is required. Travel/relocate to various unanticipated locations.

Send res to Pareto Systems LLC

4434 Bluebonnet Dr, Ste 158, Stafford, TX 77477.,Â
Â
Â,Role: Data Quality Analyst
Location: Houston TX
Duration: 12+ Months Contract

Enable AI based identification and fix Data Quality issues
Assist with DQ strategy development, process design, high-level DQ use case requirements, and implementation.
Champion DQ practices throughout the enterprise by building/maintaining relationships with stakeholders
Develop and maintain standards and policies for data quality. Define and fine-tune core processes for DQ and RDM, and establish metrics that will enable the adoption of better data quality practices
Gather DQ requirements from Business Stewards for initial profile/audit of source systems
Work with Data Modelers to ensure DQ requirements are factored into data model designs.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

AdTmuEFqP5,Job Description
Job Title: Data Warehouse Analyst III

Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PL/SQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities:
• Develop Oracle PL/SQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements.
• Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PL/SQL code.
• Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment.
• Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PL/SQL code.
• Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly
• Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates.
• Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations.
• Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business.
• Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests.
• Experienced in any source code versioning tool
• Follow SOX procedures for code deployment.
• Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled.
• Monitor batch processes daily/weekly/monthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-run/re-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends.
• Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements.
• Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible.

Education:
Bachelor’s degree in computer science, software engineering or relevant business discipline from an accredited four-year college or university or equivalent work experience.

Experience:
Experience including but not limited to
15+ years of experience in Software development
10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g
10+ years of experience in Oracle PL/SQL development
3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment
Strong Analytical skills
Troubleshooting skills
o Team Player

Additional skills:
• Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must.
• Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams.
Location = Houston, TX (downtown, no parking provided)

Rate = $55 - $74 on a W2 contract

Length = 6+ Months (Possible extension or hire for the right candidate)

Must be able to work on a W2,Job description
Tittle: Data Quality Analyst
work location - Houston TX
Client: AIG

Setup Data Quality Management processes across Data landscape in-scope.

Enable AI based identification and fix Data Quality issues
Assist with DQ strategy development, process design, high-level DQ use case requirements, and implementation.
Champion DQ practices throughout the enterprise by building/maintaining relationships with stakeholders
Develop and maintain standards and policies for data quality. Define and fine-tune core processes for DQ and RDM, and establish metrics that will enable the adoption of better data quality practices
Gather DQ requirements from Business Stewards for initial profile/audit of source systems
Work with Data Modelers to ensure DQ requirements are factored into data model designs,Job Description:

· BS/BA degree with 6+ years of experience

· Advanced knowledge of application, data and infrastructure architecture disciplines

· Understanding of architecture and design across all systems

· Working proficiency in developmental toolsets

· Knowledge of industry wide technology trends and best practices

· Ability to work in large, collaborative teams to achieve organizational goals, and passionate about building an innovative culture

· Proficiency in one or more Database Platforms / Language: SQL, Oracle, Teradata, Hadoop, Cassandra and Hive, Data Modeling: ERWin, TOAD, Collaboration Tools: Confluence, JIRA

· Understanding of software skills such as business analysis, development, maintenance and software improvement

· Gather and Publish Data Dictionaries: Maintain data models in ER/win. Capture data models from existing databases, and record descriptive information into Erwin.

· Identify business needs, organize and define data, create and maintain Conceptual, Logical and Physical data models; Maintain appropriate Version Control on data models.

· Participate in the de-normalization of the data model, ensuring that business rules which are impacted during de-normalization are implemented via an alternate mechanism (i.e. trigger, application code).

· Closely work with the App Dev team and DBA to create an appropriate Conceptual, Logical and Physical Data Model.

· Present data designs and project approaches to the DRB for review and approval, and ensure all DRB artifacts are created.

· Generate DDL and validate that the DDL is implemented properly.

· Identify opportunities to reuse data and reduce redundancy in data across the enterprise

Job Type: Contract

Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Job Title Data Warehouse Analyst III Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PLSQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization. Essential DutiesResponsibilities bull Develop Oracle PLSQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements. bull Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PLSQL code. bull Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment. bull Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PLSQL code. bull Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly bull Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates. bull Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations. bull Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business. bull Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests. bull Experienced in any source code versioning tool bull Follow SOX procedures for code deployment. bull Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled. bull Monitor batch processes dailyweeklymonthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-runre-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends. bull Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements. bull Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible. Education Bachelorrsquos degree in computer science, software engineering or relevant business discipline from an accredited four-year college or university or equivalent work experience. Experience Experience including but not limited to - 15+ years of experience in Software development - 10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g - 10+ years of experience in Oracle PLSQL development - 3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment - Strong Analytical skills - Troubleshooting skills o Team Player Additional skills bull Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must. bull Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams. Location Houston, TX (downtown, no parking provided) Rate 60 - 74 on a W2 contract Length 6+ Months (Possible extension or hire for the right candidate) Must be able to work on a W2,Job Title Data Warehouse Analyst Location Houston, TX Contract 6+ Months NO OPTCPT PLEASEhellip Description Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PLSQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization. Essential DutiesResponsibilities bull Develop Oracle PLSQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements. bull Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PLSQL code. bull Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment. bull Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PLSQL code. bull Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly bull Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates. bull Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations. bull Work effectively in a team environment. Develop a strong working relationships with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business. bull Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests. bull Experienced in any source code versioning tool bull Follow SOX procedures for code deployment. bull Create Control-M job documents and work with Control-M to get them created and scheduled. bull Monitor batch processes dailyweeklymonthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with the Control-M group on re-runre-start instructions. Willingness to perform these off-hours during weekdays and weekends. bull Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements. bull Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact the deadline as early in the process as possible. Education Bachelorrsquos degree in computer science, software engineering Experience Experience including but not limited to - 15+ years of experience in Software development - 10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g - 10+ years of experience in Oracle PLSQL development - 3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment - Strong Analytical skills - Troubleshooting skills o Team Player Additional skills bull Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must. bull Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams. Thanks and Regards, Chris K INFOMERICA INC 252 Towne Village Dr., Cary, NC-27513 Contact 919-439-9960 chrisinfomericainc.com mailtochrisinfomericainc.com httpwww.infomericainc.com httpwww.infomericainc.com,Job DescriptionÂ
Role: Data Expert (Analyst/Modeler)
Location: Houston, Texas
Client:

Who are we looking for?Â

Resource should have 10+ Years of experience in Development, Maintenance and support in IT industry
Job Description include â
Experience in data models and reporting packages
Ability to analyze large datasets
Ability to organize and lead meetings with business and operational data owners
Coordinate and communicate between business users and the data warehouse organization, balancing requirements and resources to solve business problems
Ability to write comprehensive reports
Strong verbal and written communication skills
An analytical mind and inclination for problem-solving

Job Responsibilities include -Â

Extract, clean, and manipulate data from multiple data sources and will use advanced statistical/machine learning techniques and analytical and visualization software to conduct observational cohort studies, to design and assess pilots for new products, to develop predictive models and to generate other actionable insights
Communicate insights from quantitative analyses to technical and non-technical audiences.
Build proactive data validation automation to catch data integrity issues
Build scalable solutions that create great business impact
Work with business sponsors, and IT teams to implement analytic solutions
Engage with current and prospective business partners to communicate optimization program features, benefits and results.
Utilize the power of to design and analyze highly efficient tests to derive actionable insights to improve the direct marketing effectiveness and efficiency across the sales funnel

Technical Skills:

Expertise in Statistical Design-of-Experiments
Should have experience in various data modelling tool SQL
Knowledge of R, Python, or SAS
Experience with data visualization (e.g. Tableau, PowerBi).

Process Skills:

Should have worked on Agile Methodology in prior projects
Should have followed Support / Incident Management in prior projects
Should have followed standard SDLC development process

Behavioral Skills:Â

Should have good communication skills,Role: SAS/Python Data Analyst
Experience:6+ Year
Location: Tempe AZ

Responsibility:
responsible for data requirement and insight generation for the commercial banking customer
Able to work independently
PL/SQL
Knowledge on Tableau
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Role: Data Analyst
Location: Tempe, AZ
Duration: 6+ Months

Job Description:

A driven, experienced data analyst to join the Vendor Managed Inventory team who has a passion for solving problems with data, an eye for process improvement, and the skill to execute changes.
You'll be a great fit if you have the grit to persevere through challenging or ambiguous problems, love a chance to step away from your desk to understand and improve processes, and get excited about translating data into action.

Â
Use statistical methods to analyze data and generate useful business reports to solve operational problems.
Be responsible for extracting, cleansing, and visualizing large data sets using the tools and techniques described above.
Plan and lead execution of identified process improvements and cross functional initiatives.
Proactively monitor existing reporting, identify areas of concern, and perform any additional analysis needed to understand underlying causes or nuances.
Deliver insights on urgent business challenges by performing ad hoc analysis and crafting accurate, easy to understand findings.
Forecast future performance based on impact of process improvements and changes to the business.
Work with management team to create a prioritized list of needs for each business segment.
Use data to create models that depict trends related to growth, consumption and forecast.
Work with Project managers to outline the specific data needs for each supplier negotiations.

Qualifications/Experience:

Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Engineering, Math, or similar field from an accredited undergraduate institution required.
2+ years of professional experience in data, reporting, and analytics.
Ability to collaborate effectively and work as part of a team.
Strong attention to detail.
Strong analytical skills with proficiency in Microsoft SQL Server.
Experience with visualization software; Excel, Access, Pivot Tables, V-Look Up, Tableau proficiency a big plus.
Capable of managing competing priorities.
Ability to thrive (and preference to work) in a dynamic, fast-paced environment.
Ability to communicate confidently to senior leadership.,PK currently has exciting opportunity for a Master Data Operation Analyst that would like to join our team as a full-time employee. Locations for this position are:
Bloomfield CT, New York NY, Franklin Lakes NJ, McLean VA, Raleigh NC, Denver CO, Austin TX, Chicago IL, Nashville TN, Chattanooga, TN, Phoenix AZ, Pittsburgh PA

Responsible for daily review and resolution of duplicate/linkage tasks.
Review all types of tasks based on the established workflow hierarchy (tasks: potential overlays, potential duplicates, potential linkages and review identifier).
Updates tasks as appropriate according to established procedures and guidelines, while meeting set expectations with metrics.
Provide timely and clear communication regarding production issues and business impacts, as needed.
Notifies Data Steward/Manager of errors and potential problems and provides appropriate follow up.
Maintains and protects confidentiality information.
Complies with all organizational and departmental policies and procedures.
Performs other duties as assigned.

5+ years’ experience in related data operations or analysis functions. Experience with health care operations and data preferred. Experience with Master Data analysis a plus.
Excellent decision making abilities and effective problem solving skills. Ability to analyze data and make decisions based on the information gathered.
Analytical experience (e.g. data and process analysis, quality metrics, policies, standards, and processes) preferred.
Strong time management skills; organized with strong focus and excellent attention to detail.
Strong verbal and written communication skills.
~ In order to provide equal employment and advancement opportunities to all individuals, employment decisions at PK are based exclusively on merit.  PK does not discriminate in employment opportunities or practices on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, including gender identity and identity expression, national origin, age, or any other characteristic protected by law.,Data Quality Analyst
10662
Tempe, AZ
3/25/2020 5:47:00 PM

Quality Engineering
Contractor - W2

Job Description
Good data analysis skills
Hands on experience with data profiling, DQ scorecard and profile creation, identifying DQ rules – Informatica Data Quality Analyst experience preferred
Good communication skills – ability to interact with business users to share data profiling results and get feedback
Experience working with Collibra, MDM will be a nice to have
Ability to liaison with IT partners and perform UAT
Financial background is required.
7-8 years of experience is required

Job Requirements,Title Sr Data Analyst Location Phoenix (Remote for now) Duration 1+ Years Job Description Large enterprise data management and analysis experience. Data Lake experience is a huge plus. Execute development activities to implement strategic metadata management capabilities consolidation into Collibra. Work with lines of business to define required updates to the enterprise metadata platform. Responsible for developing, enhancing, modifying andor maintaining applications in Enterprise Data Management. Build and deploys new capabilities into the metadata platform, in collaboration with other development resources. Software developers design, code, test, debug and document programs as well as support activities for the corporate systems architecture. Employees typically have in-depth knowledge of development tools and languages. Work closely with business and technology partners to provide data governance and understand data domain requirements and issues Will assist with guidance on development and implementation of data quality rules, monitoring of data quality, and helps drive data analysis, data quality improvement and issue resolution Top required skills Good Communication Documentation skills Collibra experience 1+ years Basic ETL tools experience like Informatica, etc Metadata Management Experience,Job Description
MUST HAVES:
• Knowledge of basic data management principles and concepts
• Knowledge of how to create data standards, determine business data requirements, and business rules.
• Ability to work collaboratively with analysts, architects, modelers, business and technical teams
• Proficiency in SQL for generating quality assessments and insight generation
• Excellent communication skills with both business and technical audiences
• Subject matter knowledge of bank operations and/or financial services
• Ability to leverage multiple tools to create and maintain necessary data stewardship outputs
• 3+ years of experience fulfilling the role of a Data Steward
• Experience working within a data or reporting team as an analyst, modeler or data steward
• Experience creating and using data models and data definitions
• Experience implementing and enforcing data access control mechanisms.
• Experience with improving data quality and resolving data deficiencies.
• Experience with data lifecycle management.
• Expertise in relationship building with different roles and level in the organization.
• Bachelor’s degree in business or technology; master’s preferred
=================================================
Description:
The Business Data Steward is responsible for overseeing the life cycle of a set of business data elements. Specifically, they are responsible for defining and implementing policies and procedures for the day-to-day operational and administrative management of systems and data. The Business Data Stewards is ultimately responsible for establishing data-quality metrics and requirements, including defining the values, ranges, and parameters that are acceptable for each data element. They also work with the business and technology teams to establish procedures for detection and correction of data-quality issues and collaborate to establish policies, procedures, and internal controls affecting the quality of data.,Job ID: 300-1 (Magellan Health)

Job Title: Senior Data and Reporting Analyst

Location: Phoenix, AZ 85034

Duration: 09+ months

Job Description: Senior Data and Reporting Analyst

Assists in the identification of key business issues and the design of analytic approaches.

Conducts research on identified key business issues.

Provides oversight and direction to analysts and assigned components of project work.

Evaluates and distills analyses conducted by other departments and/or outside consultants.

Assists in developing and utilizing data gathering tools, such as surveys/questionnaires, work sampling, financial modeling, and/or interview questions, to ensure that appropriate quantitative and qualitative data is gathered for the analyses.

Extracts data for analysis and interpretation.

Conducts quantitative and qualitative analyses on a broad array of issues across disciplines, projects and functional areas.

Structures and executes analysis independently.

Prepares preliminary interpretations of analyses for project teams, clients, and/or department management.

Recommends suggested action steps based on the analytic results.

Prepares reports synthesizing analytical results, highlighting implications of findings.

Follows through any further actions based on the results using sound business judgment.

Assists in the development of project proposals, recommendations, implementation plans, communication packages, performance measurement tools, and training materials related to the assigned projects.

Contributes to practice development and department administration including, recruiting, debriefing on training, and developing thought pieces on topics like change management.

May provide input to performance reviews of others in the department.

Performs other duties as required.

Responsibilities:

5-7 years of related analytical and/or consulting experience required.

Bachelor's degree in Business Administration, Computer Science, IT, Mathematics or related field. May consider an additional 3-4 years of relevant experience in lieu of Bachelor's degree.

Requires strong expertise in MS Excel and relational database such as MS Access and other database management (MS SQL) and reporting tools.

Ability to use reporting software such as Actuate, Cognos, Crystal reports, SAS, or other.

Ability to query the company's data warehouse and/or department systems in response to data requests.

Managed care experience preferred.

Database management strongly preferred.

Healthcare experience preferred.

Work Experience: Analytics/Informatics

Education: BS/BA,Greetings from Atos Syntel, We currently have a Full Time opportunity for Data Analyst at Phoenix, AZ. Data Analyst Phoenix, AZ Full Time, Knowledgeable with VBA Knowledgeable with PowerPivotPowerBI Versatile with different variations of SQL Experienced with conducting and presenting analytical findings Experienced proving follow-up support related to reporting and analytics Role-1 Level-1 Support Data analyst Atos Syntel is a leading global provider of integrated IT and knowledge process services and a member of the Atos Group, a global leader in digital transformation with 120,000 employees in 73 countries and annual revenue of 13 billion. We help global enterprises accelerate their digital journeys, increase agility and business performance, evolve their platforms to Digital native standards, and deliver scale and flexibility for todays dynamic business environment. Atos Syntel unites Atoss scale, market presence and capabilities in Orchestrated Hybrid Cloud, Big Data, Business Applications and Digital Workplace solutions with Syntels industry focus, global delivery model, and core and digital services powered by intelligent automation. Learn more at www.atos-syntel.net.,Job Roles / Responsibilities:
Data Migration profiles having expertise in (SQL Server, Excel Macros, Stored procedure)
Proficient in basic SQL and understanding of data relationships 5+ years business analyst role in technical projects that require backend/database buildout
Experience with agile project methodology and ability to work in fast pace, abstract environment
Knowledge of agile ceremonies, processes, and the tools to compliment Jira, Confluence, etc.
Strong leadership skills with the ability to work with other Client on work assignments, follow up and review of outcomes.
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Role : Data Analyst
Job type: Contract
Location : Phoenix AZ
Â
Job Description
Data Modeliing
Product development
Data Analysis,Overview

Position : Data Governance Analyst

Location : Scottsdale, AZ

Duration : 18 Months

Top Three Skills:

1. Driving Data Governance for the program

2. Data Validation and Business Rules

3. Analysis/Data Quality

Job Description:

A data governance analyst performs a variety of tasks related to governance policies, process and standards. A data governance analyst will be responsible for data definitions, root cause analysis of data issues, reference data management, and mitigation of downstream impacts associated with a project/program. A data governance analyst will approve data exceptions and data quality metrics.

Required Experience/Skills

1. Experience with Insurance or Financial Services preferred

2. Working with business decision making models

3. Data centric with a passion toward data including, data quality issue resolution, defining business definitions, enforcement of data governance policies, process, and standards, and experience working with multiple partners to ensure data quality

4. Data Governance – Acted as a data governance professional, data steward, data custodian, or other data role

5. Data Analysis – Experience as data analyst in one of the following situations:

a. Analytically Intensive – Intended to confirm the common understanding of the data.

b. Operationally Data Intensive – Intended to approve authoritative data sources that are essential to core transactional processing

c. Data Integration Intensive – Intended to confirm the common understanding data being integrated and mitigate downstream impacts

1. Taxonomy – Term definitions, hierarchy and metadata

2. Communication – Facilitator, influencing, negotiation and building partnerships between teams or business units.

3. Experience with different applications to effectively present the findings whether it is through use of charts, graphs or specialized tools.

4. 5+ years in data governance analysis with experience listed above. Above plus demonstrated leadership, communication and influencing skills relative to program and organizational level efforts.,Job Description
Job duties/description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

qWrgyZnW3X,Job Description
Our client, a real estate development company located in South Philadelphia is seeking a Data Analyst/DBA on a 6 month contract to hire basis.

Position will be worked as follows until Covid-19 restriction is completely lifted: 2 weeks remote, 2 weeks in office.

Highlights of primary responsibilities include:

Data Analyst 50%
Develop dashboards and visualizations using tools like PowerBI
Identify additional data sources that would allow new reports
Create automatic alerts for action or followup
Database Administration 40%
Development of new structured or unstructured data warehouses
Develop and maintain backup and redundancy procedures for databases
Support and optimize existing databases
Query development and troubleshooting with key applications
Support of development teams for custom and packaged applications as it relates to storing data
Migration of databases to new servers
API and Scripting Development 30%
Work on APIs and Scripts to capture data from multiple sources
Scripting of data exports or API use to share with 3rd party applications
Integrate new API platforms if needed
Requirements
Required:
3+ years experience in a DBA or Data Analyst role maintaining databases
Expertise in the following technologies:
MS SQL Server 2012 and higher
Power BI or similar visualization reporting platform
APIs using Webhooks, JSON, XML, etc
Scripting using Powershell, Python, Perl, Ruby, etc
Works effectively with co-workers inside and outside departmental boundaries, with employees in remote locations, and with vendors
Good ability to organize and produce quality work, within required specifications, to meet rigid timelines
Demonstrated ability to perform all required job duties under minimal supervision
Demonstrated initiative as a proactive self-starter, willing to go beyond specific job functions to ensure business goals are achieved and/or exceeded
Experience identifying underlying issues and determining root cause using a consistent, logical approach
Exceptional analytical skills and attention to detail
Demonstrated ability to manage multiple assigned tasks
Exceptional documentation, presentation, and communication skills
Ability and willingness to respond to emergencies during off-hours
Ability to periodically travel to remote locations

Company Description
MDS is a business and technology solutions provider founded in 1992. We provide vendor neutral IT solutions on a national and international level. MDS has built a stellar reputation based on our customer focus and expertise in converging IT service areas on a custom level for our clients. We pride ourselves on providing tailored solutions that increase effectiveness, efficiency, and profitability.,Required:
Knowledge of referential and large data formats and file structures
Knowledge of databases, including big data technologies
Knowledge of programming and SDLC
Knowledge of Metadata tagging, data classification, and defining business and technical metadata
Ability to convey complex concepts to business stakeholders in terms relevant to the business
Excellent written and verbal communications skills
Excellent data analysis skills
Organized, structured, methodical
Analytical with strong problem-solving ability
Strong prioritization and time management skills
Experience with these is a must:
Strong Python and Spark
Hadoop and/or Big data solutions
Oracle, PL/SQL, Teradata
Should have Data lineage experience
Exposure to AWS and/or Cloud environments
Should have been a developer in past
Good understanding on Code Repositories like GIT,Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Skills : agile,data analysis,system analysis,sql,aws,s3,athena,redshift,glue,communication
Description : Analyze data from a particular business domain and define how best to organize it in support of Group's cloud data architecture runway

Work with stakeholders to understand the domain's functional and data requirements

Work with stakeholders to identify use cases for data consumption

Support Data Architecture by rationalizing redundant data and developing the approach building out the Group cloud data-warehouse and analytics platforms

Support broader architecture teams in defining a business domain's master data management approach

Define and document the Data Lineage for a business domain

Skills:

7+ years of experience working in the Data or Systems Analysis field

Strong SQL skills and knowledge of various database types and technologies

Familiarity with relevant data-related AWS services (S3, Athena, Redshift, Glue, etc..)

Knowledge and Experience working in a Scaled Agile Framework

Excellent collaboration and teamwork skills

Excellent written/verbal communicationsagile,data analysis,system analysis,sql,aws,s3,athena,redshift,glue,communication,Description

Mission:

Ensure that the quality of IntegriChain’s master data elements are maintained to the highest standard for our customers, and alerting internal stakeholders in instances where these quality standards cannot be met so that customers may be informed.

Duties:
Follow and maintain the documentation surrounding IntegriChain’s data quality practices at their specified frequency focusing on the below topics.
Orphan Resolution
Point-of-Care (POC) Parenting
Channel/Class of Trade Assignment
340B Specific POC Maintenance
Covered Entity assignment
Resolution of weekly assigned master data exceptions queue.
Complete ad hoc queue resolution, and POC data stewardship efforts
Organization/Execution/Status Communication of Data Factory initiatives/projects
Participation in cross functional IntegriChain project teams and progress reporting to Data Factory stakeholders.
Facilitation/support of a productive and communicative team environment.
Effective and crisp communication to internal stakeholders around data anomalies or perceived quality issues.
Grow and learn in the role to lead training sessions for development of new Master Data Analysts
Assist Data Factory management in projects and day-to-day activities.

Requirements

Bachelor's Degree
Knowledge or previous experience with analysis tools such as SQL, R, SPSS, or SAS. SQL/R strongly preferred
Flexible and Adaptable to feedback
Adept at research utilizing open source and industry databases
Organized with an ability to prioritize and consistently follow-through
Committed to lifelong learning
Capable of working both autonomous and in a team
Willing and able to develop skills necessary to train and lead others
*At this time IntegriChain cannot transfer or sponsor visas.

**Recruiting Agencies: Please do not send unsolicited resumes to our employees, job listings, or recruiting team. IntegriChain is not responsible for any fees related to unsolicited resumes.,Job description

â¢ Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

â¢ Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

â¢ Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

â¢ Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

â¢ Filter and âœcleanâ data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

â¢ Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

â¢ Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

â¢ Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

â¢ Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

â¢ Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

â¢ Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

â¢ Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

â¢ Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

â¢ Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR,Data Analyst - Contract - W2 Malvern, PA
Type: Contract Duration: 12 + Months Rate: DOE
Company Overview:


Amplify Systems has its business focus in providing IT consulting services, resource augmentation services and packaged product implementation services.
Amplify Systems’ industry experience and technology expertise helps in delivering world class business and technology services to our clients. Our experience and deep technical knowledge enable the clients to exploit information technology to meet their business goals. We believe in simplified development processes, optimal tool selection and quality recruitment to harness value from intellectual resources.

Job Description:


Job Profile Summary
To define, gather and analyze measures of Vanguard’s client experience across all channels (with the primary focus being the web). To be an advocate for measuring client experience
Duties and Responsibilities
Owns subdivision projects that contribute to the effort of defining analytics to measure the effectiveness of our cross-channel client experiences.
Builds, maintains, and publishes dashboards and insights that surface key performance indicators.
Gathers, cleanses and analyzes data from multiple sources including but not limited to; Adobe Analytics, Tealeaf, Sitespect and Enterprise Databases.
Assists with the preparation of presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.
Provides analytics implementation requirements, representing our business needs.
Provides consulting services (with supervision) to colleagues needing data for specific projects.
Suggests analytics infrastructure improvements and decisions regarding skills, process, and technology.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties as required.
Qualifications
• Undergraduate degree (BS/BA in Economics, Finance, Statistics, Mathematics, Marketing Research preferred), or equivalent combination of training & experience.
• A minimum of three years general business experience.
• Strategic thinker with tactical abilities.
• Proficiency in applied statistical techniques, such as cluster and segmentation analysis, time series analysis, regression/logistic regression analysis, and developing and monitoring scorecards.
• Superior testing and quality control skills and attitude.
• MS office skills. Strong Excel skills in data manipulation and presentation.
• Strong analytical skills coupled with the ability to form hypotheses and draw meaningful insights from disparate data sources. Knowledge of marketing and user experience disciplines a significant plus.
• Excellent written/oral communication, project management and presentation skills. Able to clearly articulate and present findings and recommendations to team members and management, and to technical and non-technical audiences. Strong data visualization skills.
• Experience with Adobe Analytics, Tealeaf, and SiteSpect. 4+ years experience strongly desired.,Transforming the future of healthcare isn t something we take lightly. It
takes teams of the best and the brightest, working together to make an
one of the largest healthcare technology companies in the U.S., we
are a catalyst to accelerate the journey toward improved lives and healthier
communities.Here at Change Healthcare, we re using our influence to drive
positive changes across the industry, and we want motivated and passionate
people like you to help us continue to bring new and innovative ideas to life.

If you re ready to embrace your passion and do what you love with a company
that s committed to supporting your future, then you belong at Change
Healthcare.Pursue purpose. Champion innovation. Earn trust. Be agile. Include
all.Empower Your Future. Make a Difference.
The Data Analyst, Value Based Payments (VBP) will design and execute analyses
using a variety of data sources, including health care and pharmacy claims.
With guidance from the Vice President, Value Based Payment Analytics, the Data
Analyst will work with product development and implementation teams to ensure
our VBP platform delivers the necessary insights to our clients. Projects range
from quick, time-sensitive queries to longer term studies that become part of
VBP roadmap. This is an excellent opportunity for the right candidate to
influence the development of cutting edge product in the rapidly growing VBP
market.

Responsibilities
Interrogate a variety of data sources to identify patterns in data
Identify unanticipated trends/patterns in the data
Communicate suggestions for continuous improvements in data quality
Evaluate historical data to understand the impact of historical /
proposed changes to Value Based Programs
Create insights into, and metrics for client Value Based Programs work
with Product Development team to implement findings into Value Based
Payment (HealthQX) product
Clearly document and present findings from analysis projects, including
data quality, methodology, results and implications for clients.

Minimum_Requirements
3-5 years of experience in designing, building, and implementing business
solutions using information technology.
Proven, significant experience in business analysis, requirements
definition and deployment of business requirements to information
systems.

Critical_Skills
Sound written and interpersonal communication skills, ability to
translate complex methodology to both technical and non-technical
audiences.
2 or more years of experience working in Health Care, Data Analytics, or
Information Management
Excellent SQL skills, including report formatting and presentation
Health Care Claims Data experience working with or exposure to claims
data

Additional_Knowledge_&_Skills
Ability to collect, manage, analyze and interpret quantitative data
Self-sufficient with regard to standard computer desktop tools and
general office software knowledge; additional computer skills/tools a
plus
Independent worker: courage, decision quality, listening, drive for
results, customer and client focus, integrity and ability to deal with
ambiguity
Demonstrated ability to independently learn new technical skills (e.g.,
advanced Excel, SQL, R)
Must be able to manage and prioritize multiple projects at one time
Comfortable in a growing department that is still evolving its methods,
priorities and resources

Desired_Personal_Characteristics
Inquisitive, problem-solving in nature
Data-driven, detail-oriented and fact-based
Hands-on, action-oriented style
Proven ability to roll up your sleeves and contribute quickly
A team player capable of working effectively with individuals throughout
the organization

Education_/_Training
Bachelor's Degree in a field such as: Information Management, Computer
Science, Computer Engineering, Data Science, Mathematics or related field
preferred.
4-year degree in computer science or related field or equivalent
experience

Physical_Requirements
Environment Office environment, up to 10% travel required.
Physical Requirements Sitting, standing, walking, and using keyboar
Join our team today where we are creating a better coordinated, increasingly
collaborative, and more efficient healthcare system!

Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Statement

Change Healthcare is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants
will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color,
religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information,
national origin, disability, or veteran status. To read more about employment
discrimination protections under federal law, read EEO is the Law at https://
and the supplemental information at

OFCCP_EEO_Supplement_Final_JRF_QA_508c.pdf .

If you need a reasonable accommodation to assist with your application for
employment, please contact us by sending an email to
with "Applicant requesting reasonable
accommodation" as the subject. Resumes or CVs submitted to this email box will
not be accepted.

Click here
transp_%20English_formattedESQA508c.pdf to view our pay transparency
nondiscrimination policy.

Change Healthcare maintains a drug free workplace and conducts pre-employment
drug-testing, where applicable, in accordance with federal, state and local
laws.

Show moreShow less,Job Title: Business Data Analyst
Location : Bensalem, PA
Duration : 12+ Months
Employment: W2
Mode of Interview: Face to Face
Job Responsibilities:
Critical thinking and analytical skills
Effective communication approaches
Strong writing and presentation skills
Active listening (explain yourself, ask questions, willing to listen)
Familiarity with Agile project management tools (Rally, Confluence)
Business acumen
Technical acumen Experience with Data Mining, Data Reporting, SQL development, technical story writing
Experience
Acting as a business analyst on a cross-functional software product team in an agile environment.
Relevant work experience in Business Intelligence, Data Analysis and Data Reporting
Executing lean product design and agile development methods.
Driving requirements and story-writing across agile sprints.
Coordinating software releases to internal and external users.
Help optimize existing SQL queries from users
Skills & Qualification:
Bachelor degree or equivalent experience.
Minimum 3 years of experience as Business Data Analyst
Experience with generating reports from bug tracking software such as JIRA is preferred
SQL/Data Analysis
If anyone interested or available drop your resumes at kathy(at)dextroinc(dot)com,Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Skills : data analysis,cloud,AWS,S3,athena,redshift,architecture,agile,safe
Description :
7+ years of experience working in the Data or Systems Analysis field
Strong SQL skills and knowledge of various database types and technologies
Familiarity with relevant data-related AWS services (S3, Athena, Redshift, Glue, etc..) must have
Analyze data from a particular business domain and define how best to organize it in support of Group's cloud data architecture runway
Support Data Architecture by rationalizing redundant data and developing the approach building out the Group cloud data-warehouse and analytics platforms
Knowledge and Experience working in a Scaled Agile Framework
data analysis,cloud,AWS,S3,athena,redshift,architecture,agile,safe,TeamSoft's client is looking for a Data Governance Analyst for a direct hire position. Responsibilities Support and administer data quality and remediation Develop data policies and process improvements Analyze and mitigate risks Leverage business analysis to translate requirements into documentation Utilize tools like Visio, Excel, SQL, etc. Enhance data governance awareness Qualifications Bachelors degree 3+ years data analysis experience Able to build partnerships Experience in finance, banking, andor accounting Data validation experience Analytical, organization, and communication skills,Business Analyst - Data Science SQL Location Philadelphia, PA 19103 Serves as a liaison between the business community and the IT organization in order to provide technical solutions to meet user needs. Possesses expertise in the business unit(s) they support, as well as, an understanding of the IT organizationrsquos systems and capabilities. Analyzes business partnerrsquos operations to understand their strengths and weaknesses to determine opportunities to automate processes and functions. Assists in the business process redesign and documentation as needed for new technology. Translates high level business requirements into functional specifications for the IT organization and manages changes to such specifications. Educates the IT organization on the direction of the business. Negotiates agreements and commitments by facilitating communication between business unit(s) and IT from initial requirements to final implementation. Possesses an understanding of technological trends and uses this knowledge to bring solutions to business units supported to enhance the enterprisersquos competitive edge. May make recommendations for buy versus build decision. Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, Business Administration, or other related field or equivalent work experience. Must have 3 - 6 years of relevant technical or business work experience.,Highlights of primary responsibilities include:

Database Administration 40%
Development of new structured or unstructured data warehouses
Develop and maintain backup and redundancy procedures for databases
Support and optimize existing databases
Query development and troubleshooting with key applications
Support of development teams for custom and packaged applications as it relates to storing data
Migration of databases to new servers
Data Analyst 40%
Develop dashboards and visualizations using tools like PowerBI
Identify additional data sources that would allow new reports
Create automatic alerts for action or followup
API and Scripting Development 20%
Work on APIs and Scripts to capture data from multiple sources
Scripting of data exports or API use to share with 3rd party applications
Integrate new API platforms if needed
Requirements
Required:
3+ years experience in a DBA or Data Analyst role maintaining databases
Expertise in the following technologies:
MS SQL Server 2012 and higher
Power BI or similar visualization reporting platform
APIs using Webhooks, JSON, XML, etc
Scripting using Powershell, Python, Perl, Ruby, etc
Works effectively with co-workers inside and outside departmental boundaries, with employees in remote locations, and with vendors
Good ability to organize and produce quality work, within required specifications, to meet rigid timelines
Demonstrated ability to perform all required job duties under minimal supervision
Demonstrated initiative as a proactive self-starter, willing to go beyond specific job functions to ensure business goals are achieved and/or exceeded
Experience identifying underlying issues and determining root cause using a consistent, logical approach
Exceptional analytical skills and attention to detail
Demonstrated ability to manage multiple assigned tasks
Exceptional documentation, presentation, and communication skills
Ability and willingness to respond to emergencies during off-hours
Ability to periodically travel to remote locations,Role: AWS Analys/ Data analyst
Location: Malvern, PA
Contract Position(W2 only)

Job Roles / Responsibilities:
Experience in Data analyst.
Experience AWS, Java, python, EMR.
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,At E78, we assist our clients in finding just the right candidates to fit their needs! They are currently seeking an IT Project Manager/ Business Analyst to support the clients Business Intelligence/ Visualization business area. Individuals filling this role are expected to be capable of leading one or more projects within the corporate environment. Will include collaboration and integration other application, infrastructure, and project teams, and will be delivered through internal and external IT resources, including outsource vendor partners.

Responsibilities
Lead projects which often require cross-functional resources, vendor resources, outsourcing partners, and integration and interaction with business key users and project sponsors.
Create and track project plan, ensuring adherence to project management quality standards.
Responsible for assigning individual responsibilities, identifying appropriate resources as needed, and developing a schedule to ensure timely completion of the project.
Support the gathering of business requirements
Provide support for the development of testing use cases
Provide strong facilitation and communication skills to help drive project progress.
Follow up with project team members to ensure key activities are being performed.
Identify approaches to address project gaps.
Step in where necessary and support the completion of project activities.
Conduct regular project meetings, documenting status of project including technical, schedule and financial issues that may be present.
Identify and document key support activities that may be required post implementation.
Assist and review all startup and planning documents.
Manage the scope, risks, issues, deliverables, and schedule of individual project tasks.
Manage (e.g., tracks, updates, reviews) the dashboard and executive reports using metric data.
Qualifications
Bachelor's Degree (or equivalent experience) in a technical, quantitative, or business discipline
3+ years' Corporate Project Management including Agile Methodologies experience
Business Intelligence/ Visualization knowledge and implementation experience required
Strong knowledge and understanding of IT processes
Strong Analytical background and capable of gather business requirements from end user and technical team.
Strong written and verbal communications skills (English)
Strong interpersonal and networking skills
Experience in managing external vendor relationships
Experience in managing outsourced vendor partners
Strong MS Project, MS-Office, including SharePoint, Outlook, PowerPoint, Word, and Excel skills
Strict attention to detail
Communication, listening and interpersonal skills (English, oral & written)
Flexibility - adaptation to the changing needs and priorities in the work environment
Work under pressure
Ability to identify, analyze, organize and solve issues and problems in a timely and effective manner
Team approach / cooperation - work with others, and through others to meet goals, accomplish work, and resolve problems
Customer service oriented - understand and anticipate the needs of users
Ability to identify and pursue new ideas, solutions, methods or opportunities to increase productivity and quality
Effectively deal with change and resistance to change
Strong work ethic ability to foster trusting relationships, demonstrate a sense of responsibility in job performance, show commitment to quality of work, exhibit discipline and dedication to complete work, and display a sense of teamwork and respect, enabling collaboration to meet goals
Experience with JIRA,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

XzyIMjEmyt,The Information Security team is sourcing for an additional analyst to support the increasing demand for data analytics and the publication of routine metrics and reporting. Key Responsibilities Support the Metrics and Reporting team via the delivery of adhoc and routine reporting needs. Support the maturity of this new team as it develops an operational model in a tracking system to manage and measure workloads within the team Use knowledge of data structures and sources to extract data and develop intuitive reporting to Information Security management and stakeholders Deliver adhoc reporting on a flexible schedule Facilitate requirements for new reporting needs and changes to existing report Skills Data structures, SQL, MS Access, scripting and querying languages, data mining and analytics Qualifications 3+ years experience in similar role Problem solving and investigating Articulate in English written and spoken,Job Description:
Identify and implement process improvements Lead discussions with cross-functional teams on complex problems Oversee alignment of best practices and tools based on business needs.
Metadata and Data Quality Support.
metadata repository maintenance, access requests, and proper metadata association Review validate and record metadata and data quality information.
Development of definitions, data quality rules, thresholds, and standard metrics of quality for data elements that support critical business processes.
Development of controls to mitigate data quality risks including data quality plan development, monitoring data quality results, reports, and dashboards for high-risk issues.
Define and oversee high-risk data quality corrective action plans.
Oversee the data quality compliance assessment process.
Information Lifecycle Management.
Oversee archiving and purging activities of data.
Develop archiving and purging strategies and processes.
Oversee the ILM compliance assessment process identifying items that may be a risk to the corporation.
Data Security and Privacy.
Manage Data Access security as needed.
Support Privacy initiatives through analysis of sensitive data.
Ensure sensitive data is accessed and shared in accordance with policies and processes.
Master and Reference Data.
Develop Master and Reference Data processes and procedures to align with Enterprise Policies and Standards.
Create and maintain reference data in accordance with processes and procedures.
Ensure the quality and maintenance of master data.,Job Description
Description:
Gene*** established reports and metrics in a timely manner. These range from daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly.
Gene*** ad hoc reports and metrics in a timely manner by transforming new and potentially complex requirements into actionable deliverables.
Engage with internal analysts throughout the world for data requests, verification, and alignment.
Understand the complaint handling process in order to gene*** meaningful reports and metrics.
Support data requests for site audits, CAPA investigations, and continuous improvement activities to support the Quality Management System.

Knowledge:
Data extraction experience from a multitude of systems.
Bachelor's degree minimum, preferably in Life or Computer/Data Sciences, or in lieu of degree, education and 2+ years of relevant data analysis experience combination.
Stronger candidates will have knowledge of Quality System standards and regulations including 21 CFR 803 & 820, ISO 13485, and Canadian Regulations.

Skills:
Proficiency in data analysis tools and software, including Microsoft Excel at minimum.
Meticulous attention to detail
Strong time management skills
Effective communication
Excellent documentation skills,Data Anayst
San Antonio, TX
Contract position

Job Description:
Must have expertise in Tableau reportingHave idea on data visualization including different types of charts,graphs.Have idea on BI architecture,CHENEGA HEALTHCARE SERVICES, LLCCompany Job Title:Epidemiology Data AnalystChenega Job Title:Clearance:Background CheckLocation:59th Medical Wing, TXReports To:FLSA Status:Exempt, Full Time, RegularPrepared Date:06-26-2020Approved Date:06-26-2020THIS POSITION IS CONTINGENT UPON BID AWARDSummary:The Epidemiology/Data Analyst instructs all levels of Enterprise-Wide information system managers and users, to include but not limited to CHAS application users, on various epidemiology and data base applications.Duties and Responsibilities:* Coordinates database; create user profiles; query system to produce reports; perform data cleaning and quality control; and maintain data dictionary statistics.* Develop and implement empirically sound data analysis plans in keeping with evaluation and research questions.* Perform routine and complex statistical analysis, ensuring statistical integrity and efficiency using statistical software, such as Statistical Package Social Sciences (SPSS), R , or Statistical Analysis Software (SAS).* Coordinate all data collection and entry activities, ensuring minimum data integrity standards and completion of tasks in a timely manner.* Identify data entry barriers, working with program staff to research and address issues.* Collaborate with staff to implement data entry plans, scheduling and monitoring completion of tasks; recommend strategies for optimizing and integrating data across multiple platforms.* Analyze reports of data duplicates or other errors to provide ongoing appropriate communication with staff.* Generate routine and ad hoc reports, charts and other department presentation materials.* Provide support to develop new data collection instruments and pilot testing.* Implement or support all research and program evaluation projects, including writing evaluation plans and research proposals, publications and researching grant opportunities.* Update evaluation data; provide to staff requests for data; and conduct routine e-literature search.* Identify and interpret trends and patterns in complex data sets. Develop and conduct surveys and focus groups, and gather other forms of qualitative data, including participant recruitment, volunteer training and scheduling.* Research and provide surveillance accounts of emerging research findings in the field as they relate to key areas.* Develop and design systems based or automated solutions to enable data collection, tracking and reporting.* Engage operational and Line of Air Force (LAF) leadership and functional managers where necessary to identify and procure data sharing and user agreements.* Other duties as assignedMinimum Qualifications: (To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily.)* Master's degree in any one of these areas: Epidemiology, Bio-Statistics/Statistics, Public Health or closely related fields.* Minimum of four (4) years of experience, preferably within the last five (5) years working in a similar public health role, conducting epidemiologic research and/or program evaluation and statistical analysis preferred* Expert knowledge of statistical software to perform complex statistical analysis and to compute data, including regression and modeling, required.Knowledge, Skills and Abilities:* Excellent Communication skills written and oral in English* Ability to use computer and different office and military software (with training)* Strong customer service skills* Maintain a high level of confidentiality and integrity in dealing with sensitive issues, exhibiting professionalism always.* Capability of building relationships with all levels of providers.* Ability to meet and adhere to stringent deadlines.Physical Demands: (The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.)* While performing the duties of this Job, the employee is regularly required to sit and talk or hear. The employee may use repeated motions that include the arms, wrists, hands and/or fingers. The employee is occasionally required to walk, stand, climb, balance, stoop, kneel, crouch, or crawl. The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision.Work Environment: (The work environment characteristics described here are representative of those an employee encounters while performing the essential functions of this job.)* The employee will normally work in a temperature-controlled office environment, with frequent exposure to electronic office equipment.* During visits to areas of operations, may be exposed to extreme cold or hot weather conditions. Is occasionally exposed to fumes or airborne particles, toxic or caustic chemicals, and loud noise.Chenega Corporation and family of companies is an EOE.Equal Opportunity Employer/Veterans/DisabledNative preference under PL 93-638.We participate in the E-Verify Employment Verification Program.'489385,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

tgfzjKcdkk,Amyx is seeking to hire a Contract Data Analyst located in San Antonio, TX. The successful candidate must have A 4-year course of study leading to a bachelor's degree with a major in any field, that includes or is supplemented by at least 24 semester hours in any combination of the following fields: accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization. Also, a minimum of 2 years of experience serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.

Responsibilities and Skills:
Knowledge of WAWF eBusiness processes.
Knowledge of the federal acquisition process.
Knowledge of contracting principles, laws regulation and procedures.
Knowledge of methods and techniques of fact-finding, analysis, and resolution of complex problems, and the ability to develop concrete action plans to solve problems.
Knowledge and Experience of the WAWF eBusienss Suite, to include: iRAPT, EDA, IUID, CDR, MyInvoice, and Contract Closeout.
Good verbal, analytical and written communication skills.
Good organizational skills in tracking data and actions.
Knowledge and Experience writing professional documents.
Knowledge and Experience in Customer Service.
Skilled in Business Intelligence Reporting.
Proficient in the use of the Microsoft suite of applications including Word, SharePoint, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and Project as well as with Adobe Acrobat.

Supported Technologies:
Integrative Acquisition Environment
DOD acquisition system

Required Skills and Qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree and preferred majors are accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization.
2 years of experience required in serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.

Desired Skills and Qualifications:
Knowledge of Federal and DOD acquisition procedures
Amyx is an Equal Opportunity employer. Amyx is committed to providing equal employment opportunity to all job seekers. Every qualified applicant receives focused consideration for employment and no one is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability or protected veteran status. In addition to federal law requirements, Amyx complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Veterans/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Amyx is an E-Verify employer.
Amyx proudly and proactively takes affirmative action to advance employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans and individuals with disabilities.
Physical Demands
Employee needs to be able to sit at a workstation for extended periods; use hand(s) to handle or feel objects, tools, or controls; reach with hands and arms; talk and hear. Most positions require ability to work on desktop or laptop computer for extended periods of time reading, reviewing/analyzing information, and providing recommendations, summaries and/or reports in written format. Must be able to effectively communicate with others verbally and in writing. Employee may be required to occasionally lift and/or move moderate amounts of weight, typically less than 20 pounds. Regular and predictable attendance is essential.,Type of Requisition:

Pipeline

Clearance Level Must Currently Possess:

None

Clearance Level Must Be Able to Obtain:

None

Suitability:

No Suitability Required

Public Trust/Other Required:

NACLC (T3)

Job Family:

Epidemiology

Job Description:

GDIT is seeking an Epidemiology Data Analyst in support of the 59th Medical Wing (59 MDW). The 59th Medical Wing Science and Technology (ST) office advises and conducts clinical and translational research on matters pertaining to the medical aspects of the Air Expeditionary Force and the health of Air Force (AF) personnel and beneficiaries. In order to support the required research, ST offices conduct translational research in the areas of emergency medical care, combat casualty care, force health protection, restorative medicine, clinical and rehabilitative medicine and specialty centers.

Summary:

Instructs all levels of Enterprise-Wide information system managers and users, to include but not limited to CHAS application users, on various epidemiology and data base applications.

Duties & Responsibilities:

 Coordinates database; create user profiles; query system to produce reports; perform data cleaning and quality control; and maintain data dictionary statistics.

 Develop and implement empirically sound data analysis plans in keeping with evaluation and research questions.

 Perform routine and complex statistical analysis, ensuring statistical integrity and efficiency using statistical software, such as Statistical Package Social Sciences (SPSS), R+, or Statistical Analysis Software (SAS).

 Coordinate all data collection and entry activities, ensuring minimum data integrity standards and completion of tasks in a timely manner.

 Identify data entry barriers, working with program staff to research and address issues.

 Collaborate with staff to implement data entry plans, scheduling and monitoring completion of tasks; recommend strategies for optimizing and integrating data across multiple platforms.

 Analyze reports of data duplicates or other errors to provide ongoing appropriate communication with staff.

 Generate routine and ad hoc reports, charts and other department presentation materials.

 Provide support to develop new data collection instruments and pilot testing.

 Implement or support all research and program evaluation projects, including writing evaluation plans and research proposals, publications and researching grant opportunities.

 Update evaluation data; provide to staff requests for data; and conduct routine e-literature search.

 Identify and interpret trends and patterns in complex data sets. Develop and conduct surveys and focus groups, and gather other forms of qualitative data, including participant recruitment, volunteer training and scheduling.

 Research and provide surveillance accounts of emerging research findings in the field as they relate to key areas.

 Develop and design systems based or automated solutions to enable data collection, tracking and reporting.

 Engage operational and Line of Air Force (LAF) leadership and functional managers where necessary to identify and procure data sharing and user agreements.

Minimum Qualification and Experience:

 Master’s degree required in any one of these areas: Epidemiology, Bio-Statistics/Statistics, Public Health or closely related fields.

 Expert knowledge of statistical software to perform complex statistical analysis and to compute data, including regression and modeling, required.

Minimum of four (4) years of experience, preferably within the last five (5) years working in a similar public health role, conducting epidemiologic research and/or program evaluation and statistical analysis preferred.

Scheduled Weekly Hours:

40

Travel Required:

None

Telecommuting Options:

Telecommuting Not Allowed

Work Location:

USA TX Lackland AFB

Additional Work Locations:

We are GDIT. The people supporting some of the most complex government, defense, and intelligence projects across the country. We deliver. Bringing the expertise needed to understand and advance critical missions. We transform. Shifting the ways clients invest in, integrate, and innovate technology solutions. We ensure today is safe and tomorrow is smarter. We are there. On the ground, beside our clients, in the lab, and everywhere in between. Offering the technology transformations, strategy, and mission services needed to get the job done.

GDIT is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or veteran status, or any other protected class.,We have the below role open with our direct end customer in San Antonio TX for the long-term contract.

Our client is a world leader in manager cloud computing and uses cutting-edge technologies

Interested candidates, please send the resume along with rate and contact.

Responsibilities:
• Person must be an expert at pulling data.
• Person must not be satisfied to only pulldata only, but is very interested in understanding and analyzing the data aswell.
• The person will need to exercise a lot of initiative to be successful in this role as the end goal is well-defined but how we choose to get there is not.
• Need a person who insists on understanding the business objective and can be a creative problem solver to figure out the best way to get data or analyze the data
• The person will assist in creating a way to measure multiple steps in our inventory ordering process so that we can figure out how best to speed up the process.

RequiredSkills (and years of experience): TOP 5 SKILLS NEEDED

• Expert SQL Server skills (SSIS, SSAS, SSRS):3+ years
• Advanced PowerPivots or PowerQuery: 2+years
• Advanced Excel: 4+ years
• Advanced analysis: 3+ years

Preferred Skills: (NICE TO HAVES)
• Oracle E-business suite R12: 2+ years
o OBIEE: 2+ years
• Data Warehousing: 2+ years
• VBA: 2+ years
• Python: 1+ years

Required Soft Skills:
• Communicates clearly (both verbal &written)
• Self-starter,Company: Cyber Warrior Network - - Matching the Talent to the Task.
Job Title: Data Security Analyst
Location: San Antonio, TX
Clearance Level: Secret
Minimum Education: Bachelor’s or Master’s degree in information systems, computer security, or related field.

Company Brief:
Cyber Warrior Network (CWN): First Secure Decentralized Cyber Skills, Education and Workforce Ecosystem. Our mission is to create a global cyber talent pipeline of Military Cyber Warriors to solve cyber workforce shortage.

Talent Matching & CWN Culture:
We Connect, Match, Hire and Retain the world's most Battle-tested and Trusted Cyber Talent. We partner with employers that understand the unique skill sets that Military and National Security professionals possess.

Technology:
We understand that its virtually impossible to translate your classified experience via a resume or LinkedIn profile. Our Machine Learning AI will translate and quantify your skills & experience to match you to careers that you're best suited for.

Employer Needs:
CWN "Parriot Employer" is seeking a solution oriented individual with demonstrated experience/skills:
Database Security
Management
Information Security
Siem
Communication
Solutions
SOC
CISSP
Testing
Cyber Security
IDS
Reporting
Firewalls
Sql

Career Role Details:
Implementing or manage security functionality or controls in data center environments.
Provide excellent technical skills and knowledge to successfully manage project work; broad understanding of network, database and application security issues.
Provide broad hand-on knowledge of firewalls, intrusion detection systems, anti-virus software, data encryptions, and other industry-standard techniques and practices.
Versed in strategic policy guidance and is familiar with the higher headquarter offices who develop government policy that effects the configuration of the Learning Services Ecosystem.
Minimum Education:
5+ years of direct experience implementing or managing security functionality or controls in data center environments. Excellent technical skills and knowledge to successfully manage project work; broad understanding of network, database and application security issues. Broad hand-on knowledge of firewalls, intrusion detection systems, anti-virus software, data encryptions, and other industry-standard techniques and practices.

“Your reputation is more important than your paycheck, and your integrity is worth more than your career.” - Ryan Freitas,Data Analyst/Engineers

San Antonio, TX

Direct client

Long Term project

Expertise in IBM Datastage 11.5Experience on Unix and Shell scriptingKnowledge on SQL Query

Exposure to Scheduler (Control M)Knowledge on IBM DB2 Database

Analyse the business requirement Enhance/Build ETL batch application for data loadProvide Production Support

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Amyx is seeking to hire a Senior Contract Data Analyst located in San Antonio TX, The successful candidate must have A 4-year course of study leading to a bachelor's degree with a major in any field, that includes or is supplemented by at least 24 semester hours in any combination of the following fields: accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization. Also, a minimum of 5 years of experience serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.

Responsibilities and Skills:
Extensive knowledge of all phases of acquisition management.
Extensive knowledge of federal and DoD contracting principles (Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), DoD Directives and Instructions, laws, regulations and procedures.
Knowledge of the methods and techniques of fact-finding, analysis, and resolution of complex problems, and the ability to develop concrete action plans to solve problems.
Knowledge and Experience in the following government-wide system’s use and policy such as: FPDS, eSRS, FSRS, FBO, FAPIIS, and CPARS.
Knowledge of the DOD Procurement Data Standards (PDS)/PDS error Guide.
Good verbal, analytical and written communication skills.
Good organizational skills in tracking data and actions.
Experience in Customer Service.
Knowledge and Experience writing professional documents.
Knowledge and Experience of procurement and/or contracting.
Skilled in Business Intelligence Reporting.
Well versed in MS Word, Excel, Share Point and Power Point.
Supported Technologies:
Integrative Acquisition Environment
DOD acquisition system

Required Skills and Qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree and preferred candidates will have a major in or is supplemented by at least 24 semester hours in any combination of the following fields: accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization.
5 years of experience required serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.
Desired Skills and Qualifications:
Knowledge of Federal and DOD acquisition procedures
Amyx is an Equal Opportunity employer. Amyx is committed to providing equal employment opportunity to all job seekers. Every qualified applicant receives focused consideration for employment and no one is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability or protected veteran status. In addition to federal law requirements, Amyx complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Veterans/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Amyx is an E-Verify employer.
Amyx proudly and proactively takes affirmative action to advance employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans and individuals with disabilities.
Physical Demands
Employee needs to be able to sit at a workstation for extended periods; use hand(s) to handle or feel objects, tools, or controls; reach with hands and arms; talk and hear. Most positions require ability to work on desktop or laptop computer for extended periods of time reading, reviewing/analyzing information, and providing recommendations, summaries and/or reports in written format. Must be able to effectively communicate with others verbally and in writing. Employee may be required to occasionally lift and/or move moderate amounts of weight, typically less than 20 pounds. Regular and predictable attendance is essential.,Role: Functional Analyst (CECL Data)<b>
Location: San Antonio, TX

Full time
Start ASAP
Visa: US citizens, Green Card holders

Â

Job Description

Â
8 â 10 years of industry experience as an analyst, either functional or data analysis
At least 5 years of accounting and finance data analysis experience
2+ years of experience as data analyst for any regulatory (DFAST, CCAR) model development, implementation
Strong understanding of CECL, ALLL, credit risk, financial risk, and their processes
Knowledge / experience on the SAS Expected Credit Loss Solution
Detail oriented individual with strong analytical, organizational, and problem solving skills
Ability to communicate complex analytical issues in understandable terms appropriate for management interactions
Proficiently use Microsoft Office tools to prepare and present
Good to have knowledge of generally accepted accounting principles and concepts
Public accounting experience / CPA license preferred
Banking, credit risk or loan accounting experience preferred
Knowledge or interest in learning SQL desirable
Â

Â
Participate in CECL Data Gathering discussions with the Information Architects, Technical Architects, Data SMEs, etc
Document outcomes of the various data preparation activities, develop presentations to share with the respective stake holders
Analyze CECL related data, and resolve errors/inconsistencies in data for design and build the data repository for CECL
Create Process Documents for the data gathering and implementation activities.
Support the Agile Product Owner by performing required analysis in creating Features and User Stories for the SAFe team
Support the Data Team to identify the right data from the data sources,Job Title: Data Analyst
Location: San Diego, CA
Duration: 6 Months
Job Description:
The Data Analyst will design and perform data testing and validation functions and contribute to the enhancement of policies, processes, and documentation for various types of data acquired or produced by the agency's modeling, forecasting, analysis, and mapping efforts.
The Data Analyst ensures the integrity, validity, and credibility of data flowing into and out of various spatial and non-spatial databases.
Roles & Responsibilities:
This position is best suited for a data quality assurance/quality control professional with experience in data analytics and complex query development. We anticipate career development will occur while working on the types of duties and responsibilities described below and through mentoring and close collaboration with agency executives. Examples of primary responsibilities include:
Analyze and validate regional economic, demographic, land use, and transportation data for use in operational, procedural, and policy decision-making activities; interpret multi-disciplinary data demonstrating a thorough understanding of issues that could affect the validity and reliability of information.
Design, develop, and perform robust quality assurance testing and analysis of regional data; apply analytical and problem-solving skills to identify and report data anomalies, identify root cause patterns, and facilitate resolutions to issues.
Develop complex queries to examine existing or prospective datasets; develop and implement test approaches, automated tests, test environment requirements, and data strategies; identify risks and problem areas and recommend standards, policies, and procedures to correct deficiencies.
Create and maintain documentation related to data compliance, business rules, data flows, process flows, and reporting.
Coordinate the preparation of metrics and statistical reports, perform audits, and complete special studies; prepare spreadsheets, charts, and graphs to support information sharing.
Participate in the maintenance and documentation of comprehensive computerized databases in SQL Server, Excel, and Access formats.
Participate on inter-departmental and interagency teams assembled for various agency projects.
Prepare and present written, oral, and visual reports and recommendations to various teams and upper management.
Required Qualification:
The minimum education, training, and experience qualifications include a bachelor's degree with major course work in computer science, management information systems, regional planning, geography, demography, economics, statistics, mathematics or a related field, and one to four years of professional quality assurance, data analysis, database, and programming experience.
Knowledge of quality assurance and quality control practices used for validating data and ensuring data integrity, including statistical analysis and sampling techniques, preferably for demographic and economic data.
Experience with data analysis and research methodologies; knowledge of data acquisition and quality control methods used for gathering and compiling various types of information; knowledge of factors that contribute to the reliability and integrity of collected data.
Ability to understand, simplify, statistically analyze, and effectively interpret data and report problems through written and/or graphical formats in a highly complex and data-centric environment.
Experience analyzing, organizing, interpreting, and exploring data with the ability to Client patterns, meaningful relationships, anomalies, and trends.
Experience performing complex dataset queries, to include developing and maintaining various tests and data strategies for risk identification and highest quality data standards assurance.
Demonstrated computer software proficiency using the Microsoft Office Suite especially Excel and Access, SharePoint or other collaboration portal systems, SQL Server or other relational database management system; knowledge of database construction, management, and retrieval methods.
Programming experience in SQL, R, Python, Java, or other language.
Experience using Business Intelligence/Information Sharing software (Power BI, Tableau, etc.) to create reports and dashboards.
Experience participating in multi-disciplinary project teams and providing expertise regarding quality assurance and quality control practices.
Familiarity with formalized data governance processes and procedures.
Experience communicating highly technical information effectively, both orally and in writing; to a broad range of audiences; ability to prepare and deliver findings, presentations and recommendations regarding various analytical efforts to management, partner teams, and other audiences.
Excellent organizational skills and the ability to manage several concurrent projects at various stages of completion; ability to establish and maintain priorities and work independently.
Required Experience:
Experience analyzing, organizing, interpreting, and exploring data with the ability to Client patterns, meaningful relationships, anomalies, and trends.
Experience performing complex dataset queries, to include developing and maintaining various tests and data strategies for risk identification and highest quality data standards assurance.
Demonstrated computer software proficiency using the Microsoft Office Suite especially Excel and Access, SharePoint or other collaboration portal systems, SQL Server or other relational database management system; knowledge of database construction, management, and retrieval methods.
Programming experience in SQL, R, Python, Java, or other language.
Experience using Business Intelligence/Information Sharing software (Power BI, Tableau, etc.) to create reports and dashboards.
4-5 years of experience
About our Company:
22nd Century Technologies is a business enterprise that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Its journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century technologies supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions. With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Technologies is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

ngxFtVtLGv,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

XeoT3TSJ4T,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

13htvriMsx,Client seeks a talented, results-oriented data specialist to join our motivated and diverse team focusing on informatics and data enablement initiatives in Research and Early Development (RED). The individual will manage the product development of a data ecosystem platform and build complementary data pipelines for processing various types of primary and secondary high-dimensional data in pre-clinical and clinical settings where data is being employed to identify molecular drug targets, characterize MOA, prioritize disease indications and generate patient selection hypotheses. This hands-on role interfaces closely with computational scientists in Informatics and Predictive Sciences and business partners in IT and supports programs spanning both discovery and translational sciences. We are seeking an individual with extensive experience integrating data and building data solutions to make data accessible and actionable for the RED community. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following bull Manage the product development of a data ecosystem web platform in collaboration with a team of software developers, IT business partners and scientists bull Acquire user feedback from both external and internal teams to establish business requirements for a future state integrated ecosystem bull Communicate requirements and value proposition of data products from both customer and product owner perspectives to IT business partners and other stakeholders bull Perform user acceptance testing, backlog grooming and write user stories in coordination with IT and the developer team to ensure a robust, quality user experience bull Design, implement and manage ETL data pipelines that ingest vast amounts of genomic, phenotypic and screening data from public, internal and partner sources bull Innovate and advise on latest technologies and best practices in Data Engineering and be able to identify software solutions that can solve pain points in data enablement bull Apply value-driven approaches to the development of data ecosystem and pipeline initiatives bull Collaborate with colleagues across Informatics and Predictive Sciences to make data, including rawinterim data, available to RED department personnel as required Experience and Education bull Bachelorrsquos degree or a Masterrsquos degree with at least 3 yearsrsquo experience in a scientific or engineering field bull Proficiency in object-oriented programming with languages such as Python bull Proficiency with modern software development methodologies such as Agile, source control, CICD, project management and issue tracking with JIRA bull Experience with a metrics-driven approach to building impactful and enabling data products bull Working knowledge of ETL pipelines and workflow managements tools preferred, such as Airflow, Luigi, AWS Glue, Amazon Kinesis or AWS Step Functions bull Working knowledge of SQL and NoSQL databases preferred, such as Postgres, Redshift, or Elasticsearch bull Certified Scrum Product Owner certificate highly preferred bull Must thrive in a complex, dynamic environment while adapting to dynamically changing priorities bull Must have excellent written and verbal communication and presentation skills bull Must have excellent time management, task estimation and organizational skills,Type of Requisition:

Regular

Clearance Level Must Currently Possess:

None

Clearance Level Must Be Able to Obtain:

None

Suitability:

No Suitability Required

Public Trust/Other Required:

NACLC (T3)

Job Family:

Data Analysis

Job Description:

GDIT is seeking a Data Manager - Bioinformatics Analyst in support of the Naval Health Research Center (NHRC) Infectious Disease Field Surveillance and Laboratory Research Services. As the Navy hub for the Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center the NHRC Operational Infectious Diseases Directorate conducts on-going, laboratory-based surveillance of US military populations in unique environments to quantify and study the etiology of infectious illnesses. This position will provide support services for operational infectious disease surveillance, accredited clinical laboratory testing, diagnostic evaluations, clinical research support and scientific research services.

RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Bioinformatics Analyst is responsible for providing collaborative bioinformatics support to the investigators at the Naval Health Research Center (NHRC). He/She is responsible for:
Support to NHRC’s COVID-19 surveillance efforts via the analysis of complex data sets.
Analysis and interpretation of high-throughput biomedical data generated by diverse platforms with emphasis on next-generation sequencing
Contribute to a team effort in designing, developing and deploying robust workflows, as well as custom scripts, to support the analysis of high-throughput data
Responsible for the organization and management of large genomic datasets, and the integration of data from multiple sources
Mining publicly available biological data to generate novel hypotheses or insights
Presenting analysis results, in a clear and concise manner, to an audience not familiar with bioinformatics
REQUIRED QUALIFICATIONS:
Bachelors Degree in biomedical science/bioinformatics/math/statistics/computer-related field
2 years related experience
Experience with bioinformatics tools and databases
Experience managing large genomic data sets including integration with data available from public sources
Proficiency in at least two of the following programming languages: Perl, Python, R, Java and C/C++
Record of scientific achievements including journal publications or presentations
Must be a US citizen with the ability to obtain a favorable NACLC T3 security investigation prior to start date.
Expected Competencies:
Experience in analysis of next generation sequencing (NGS) data (including quality metrics, mapping, variant calling, quantitation of gene expression and biological interpretation)
Experience in analysis of large genomic data sets including integration with data available from multiple sources
Hands-on experience in data processing and analyzing sequencing and expression and other array data including quality and biological assessment are also essential
Ability to understand and analyze data from complex experimental designs
Experience in at least two of the following areas: metagenomics, ChIPSeq, RNASeq, ExomeSeq, DHS-Seq, microarray analysis
Familiarity with public databases: NCBI, Ensembl, TCGA, cBioPortal, Broad FireHose
#MilitaryHealthGDITJobs

Scheduled Weekly Hours:

40

Travel Required:

None

Telecommuting Options:

Telecommuting Not Allowed

Work Location:

USA CA San Diego

Additional Work Locations:

We are GDIT. The people supporting some of the most complex government, defense, and intelligence projects across the country. We deliver. Bringing the expertise needed to understand and advance critical missions. We transform. Shifting the ways clients invest in, integrate, and innovate technology solutions. We ensure today is safe and tomorrow is smarter. We are there. On the ground, beside our clients, in the lab, and everywhere in between. Offering the technology transformations, strategy, and mission services needed to get the job done.

GDIT is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or veteran status, or any other protected class.,Senior Tactical Data Link System Analyst (multiple locations)

SBG Technology Solutions, Inc. (SBG) is growing and would like you to come and join our team!

SBG, a service-disabled veteran owned small business specializing in engineering, information technology, cyber-security, and training, is looking for results-oriented Senior Tactical Data Link System Analysts. We are seeking highly motivated individuals looking to join our rapidly growing company. The ideal candidates for this position would be experienced individuals who are hard-working, have the ability to excel in a fast-paced government contractor environment, and have a positive, energetic attitude. These positions are located in San Diego, CA; Norfolk/Virginia Beach, VA; Washington D.C. Metro; and Hawaii areas.

Overview

SBG Technology Solutions seeks Senior Tactical Data Link System Analysts to work on an exciting Department of Defense contract to provide Systems Engineering & Technical Assistance (SETA) Support Services. These positions will support the Program Executive Office Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (PEO C4I) in their work to transform, modernize, improve, and sustain current and future operational maritime tactical Command and Control needs into effective and affordable C2 capabilities for Navy, Marine Corps, Joint, and Coalition warfighters. The overarching goal is to integrate programs into single C2 capabilities, provide configuration and scalable solutions to various platforms, and align to the FORCEnet roadmap.

Key Responsibilities:
Provides DoD Interagency, Coalition, and Enterprise Architecture (EA) leadership support and technical implementation expertise in Tactical Data Link design, development, and governance. The contractor shall support the deployment of DoD EA.
Supports analysis of Enterprise Architecture (EA) activities to include: implementing standard architectural practices; establishing an EA aligned with the Department's strategic goals; facilitating an information exchange; ensuring the interoperability of business practices, systems, and technologies; defining and implementing a systems development life-cycle; architectural assessments and governance; and providing a framework for corporate systems modernization.
Assists with the development of the C4ISR Data Strategy which includes Information Operations (IO), Combat Systems, Tactical Communications, C2 and Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) domains.
Supports the update of program/project databases to support system engineering requirements including problem resolution, use of formulas and other data/statistical analysis tools including graphs, pivot charts, and custom reports, support for meeting
Supports the development of technical papers for initiating new research and development efforts aligned to POR requirements to include conducting analysis, reviewing technical submissions, alignment of effort to POR, and developing test procedures.
Provides technical support and analyses for Analyses of Alternatives (AoAs).
Position Requirements:
A Bachelor’s degree in technical and business area
Active Secret DoD security clearance.
New Navy Ship Construction (SCN) Tactical Data Link planning and design experience.
Comprehensive understanding of Naval Warfare System Certification process and its application to C2P and Link 16. Comprehensive understanding of PEO IWS combat system configuration control board and combat system certification and weapon system safety processes and its application to C2P and Link 16.
Comprehensive understanding of AEGIS and SSDS Combat system Baseline Development process and relationship of combat system baseline processes to C2P and Link 16 planning.
US Navy and/or US Air Force Tactical Data Link experience.
Experience with Department of Defense (DoD), Department of Navy (DoN), Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA), PEO, and SPAWAR policies directives, instructions, standards, specifications, and processes.
Comprehensive understanding of SHIPMAIN process and Navy procurement and installation budgeting process.
The ability to apply TDL system engineering skills to development of SCN 7300 cost estimation forms and application of TDL system engineering skills to SCN IPTs is required
Must be a U.S. Citizen to obtain and maintain DoD Security Clearance.
Desired Skills and Experience
8 years of combat system/TDL experience in the Navy’s Warfare System Certification and Fleet Modernization program is highly desired
We offer a very competitive benefits package, in a family-friendly environment.

SBG is an Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/D/V,Looking for consultant for short-term contract. Years of Experience 5+ years. Role Requirements PIM or Plumslice experience. Strong experience in Data Migration, PIM and MDM experience. Skill Set Needed Strong in Data Integration and Bulk Data Validation (Functional Performance) Testing Knowledge in End to End integration of Product Data and integrations Experience in Plumslice or IBM PIM is strong plus. Strong in SQL and PLSQL Experience in testing integration layers like ETL, XML Validations Experience of Test Design, Test Planning, Test Execution, Defect Management and UAT support.,About AtosAtos is a global leader in digital transformation with over 110,000 employees in 73 countries and annual revenue of over 11 billion. European number one in Cloud, Cybersecurity and High-Performance Computing, the Group provides end-to-end Orchestrated Hybrid Cloud, Big Data, Business Applications and Digital Workplace solutions. The group is the Worldwide Information Technology Partner for the Olympic & Paralympic Games and operates under the brands Atos, Atos Syntel, and Unify. Atos is a SE (Societas Europaea), listed on the CAC40 Paris stock index.The purpose of Atos is to help design the future of the information technology space. Its expertise and services support the development of knowledge, education as well as multicultural and pluralistic approaches to research that contribute to scientific and technological excellence. Across the world, the group enables its customers, employees and collaborators, and members of societies at large to live, work and develop sustainably and confidently in the information technology space.App Dev is only position available within this track. Data Scientist and Business Analyst roles are filled.Position -Software Development - IGNITE Graduate Development ProgramApplication Developer / Data Scientist / Business Analyst - Entry LevelLocation -Irving, TXThe IGNITE graduate development program is being jointly run by the Atos, Atos Syntel and Maven Wave, who are part of the same global IT services group.The Opportunity -Are you looking to ignite your career in technology? Then this will be a fantastic opportunity for you. Waste no time and accelerate your career to become a cloud professional. Using groundbreaking technologies, embracing agile principles and furthering our new cloud practice at the strategic heart of Atos.We empower the most dynamic brands in the world with digital disruption of their industries and digital advancement of their companies. Each year we support graduates across the globe to start their digital journey, we're with you all the way - nurturing your talent, developing your potential and helping you achieve your ambitions.The Software Development Graduate Development Program is designed in phases and is a mixture of formats.* In Phase One, we focus on cloud fundamentals enabling you to find your way within our organization.* In Phase Two, we deep dive into Microservices, Programming languages and DevOps and start working with our amazing customers. We will empower you to attain core cloud technology certifications and get you working directly with our enterprise customers.* In Phase Three, you will select one or more specializations, such as AI, Machine Learning, Kubernetes or Mobile App Development.Throughout this program, we will invite our strategic partners to come in and educate you on their products which are a key part of our solutions today. Are you ready to become the next AWS, Google, and Microsoft Cloud App Development expert?Job Roles after completion -Application DeveloperBrings new ideas to life building impactful solutions and experiences integrating state of the art technologies such as AR, VR and CV. Works closely with business analysts to translate business requirements into technical specifications. Demonstrates solid grasp of software development lifecycle including DevOps and Site reliability engineering. Experience with cloud native methodologies and integrating third-party applications within a complex enterprise application portfolio. Proficiency in traditional application and mobile application development frameworks including exposure to UX/UI design.Data ScientistHelp customers improve their business and operational strategies by processing, analyzing and interpreting advanced data sets. This meaningful role requires expertise in designing and building statistical forecasting models and a passion for problem-framing and problem-solving. Engaging broadly across different customer teams to structure complex business challenges. Selecting the most suitable mathematical models and statistical techniques to address the posed business challenges. Demonstrates expert level knowledge of public cloud, open source, big data and machine learning tools.Business Analyst/ Product OwnerAn exhilarating evolution of the traditional consulting role. Interacts with the customer to understand the digital business challenges. Analyzes business processes, visualize data, articulate business requirements and translate these into engineering requirements. Prioritizes and communicates user needs, making recommendations for process or product feature changes. Enhances Atos operational workflows through process improvements and maximization of automation opportunities.Your Qualifications* University degree majoring in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Math)* Within 24 months after graduation* Minimum GPA: 3.0* Professional curiosity and the ability to enable yourself in new technologies* Enthusiasm, resilience, and a positive attitude* We expect excellent communications skills in English* Willing to travel* Dedication to a 12-month development program focusing on both professional and personal development. After successful completion we help you transition into one of the job roles.Your Application -We are now hiring for our July 2020 intake. If you wish to apply for this position, please click below to complete our online application form and attach your CV in either Word, rtf or text format. Successful candidates will be invited for an introductory phone or video interview. Please note that we do not accept applications over social media or by email. For questions, you may contact ignite@atos.netHere at Atos, we want all of our employees to feel valued, appreciated, and free to be who they are at work. Our employee lifecycle processes are designed to prevent discrimination against our people regardless of gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, religion, ethnicity, age, neurodiversity, disability status, citizenship, or any other aspect which makes them unique. Across the globe, we have created a variety of programs to embed our Atos culture of inclusivity, and work hard to ensure that all of our employees have an equal opportunity to contribute and feel that they are exactly where they belong.,Job details

Title Data Analyst 1017
Company Yeti Technologies
Salary 0
Company type Information Technology
Published on 2017-10-24
Apply before 2017-10-24
Job Details
PRIMARY FUNCTION:

The Data Analyst is an entry level position and is responsible for processing the data obtained from experiments performed according to protocol, facility SOP and the appropriate regulations. The analyst will gain familiarity with advanced analytics tools and techniques and will be accountable for evaluating and communicating impacts of business decisions

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS OF THE JOB:
Analyze data and use analytical tools and techniques
Monitor and evaluate patterns and trends
Generate standard reports for consistency in data analysis
Develop insight into member and provider performance and the variables affecting performance
Write and modify basic SQL programs for data extraction.
Provide user specific ad hoc reporting as requested.
Proactively seeks training and builds knowledge/experience of analytic tools, languages, and data sources
Produce spreadsheets, documents and presentations that are well-documented and easy to follow (i.e. Excel & PowerPoint)
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Experience in writing SQL
Proficient with Microsoft Excel
Performs other duties as assigned
Ability to work independently and in a strong team environment
Ability to project a positive attitude and high degree of self-confidence
Ability to effectively manage time
Strong analytical, research, and problem solving skills
Strong verbal and written communication skills
Programming knowledge (Python, C# or R) a plus
EDUCATION: Bachelor’s degree or higher. Relevant major’s preferred (Finance, Economics, Computer Science, Mathematics or Information Technology.),Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

dvGkBmcWok,Job Description :* Exposure to Capital Market data, e.g. P&L, PAA, Securities, Balance Sheet, Trade* Expert in SQL and data analysis* Added advantage - Knowledge on Hive, Impala, Aginity Workbench (Genesis)* Expert in Microsoft Excel, Microsoft PPT - for senior management reporting.* Excellent communication skills - written and verbal.* Excellent coordination skills - will have coordinate with senior members across various verticals.What's in it for you?* Excellent benefits plan: medical, dental, vision, life, FSA, & PTO* Roll over vacation days* Commuter benefits* Excellent growth and advancement opportunities* Certification reimbursement* Rewards and recognition programs* Innovative and collaborative company culture*"LTI values diversity and inclusion and is committed to the principles of Equal Employment Opportunity EOE/Minority/Female/Veteran/Disabled/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity."Nearest Major Market: IrvingNearest Secondary Market: DallasJob Segment: Systems Analyst, Database, Consulting, SQL, Technology,Data Analyst

Location: Plano, TX

Duration: 1 year

Top Skills:

Python

SQL

Visualization tool like Tableau

Collecting and translating requirements

Nice to have:

Pyspark, ETL tools, working through packages within python, AML algorithms

Team Info:

Set up my loan experience.

Onboard new customers who come from Auto Finance family

Set up their accounts, initiate digital contacts and initial calling contacts within the 3 month window of setting up their loans,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

HtD5S6CVCm,NTT DATA Services strives to hire exceptional, innovative and passionate individuals who want to grow with us. If you want to be part of an inclusive, adaptable, and forward-thinking organization, apply now.

We are currently seeking a Business Analyst - Data Protection to join our team in Louisville, Kentucky (US-KY), United States (US).

Business/Systems Analyst – Data Protection

Duties & Responsibilities:
Creates and drives strategies/initiatives for protecting production data protection that impacts multiple applications within one or more portfolios.
Elicit and document data masking requirements to support processes and workflows.
Develop data mappings to existing data sources.
Develop data requirements for new data sources.
Define new business data models.
Analytically addresses complex problems, processes critical data, establishes facts, and draws quality conclusions
Perform data validation testing for systems implementation projects to ensure the quality of project deliverables.
Assist with the planning and completion of data driven projects.
Perform data analysis and cleansing activities
Assist in the development and implementation of data management tools
Support Sr. Data Masking Specialist with analysis, documentation, and development of tools and procedures to support data governance and quality processes
Basic Qualifications:
BS in Computer Science, Information Systems, or related discipline
Minimum 5 years of experience as Business analyst
Experience supporting healthcare payer business processes and testing activities for enrollment, quote to card, claim processing and payment, etc.
Experience working on a Data masking project using any of the following tools: CA TDM, Informatica, Optim, or Delphix.
Experience presenting and communicating to Senior Level Leadership
Experience with Azure cloud and/or similar cloud environments.
Experience in DevOps (Software development and information technology operations)
Experience with SharePoint, Microsoft applications including Word, Excel, Visio and Outlook
Exposure to business requirements gathering tool (HP-ALM or Rally or Jira, etc.)
Experience working in environments consisting of local area networks (LAN), Unisys/IBM Mainframe data environments, Linux, Oracle and/or MS SQL Server RDBMS
Experience writing SQL or PL/SQL queries for various database
Experience creating subset plan and building subset queries for large databases
Nice to have
Experience working on a Protegrity implementation project
Graduate Degree in Computer Science or related discipline
Experience with qTest, Azure ADO, or Blueprint
Travel:

On-site position in Plano, TX OR Louisville, KY.

About NTT DATA Services

NTT DATA Services is a global business and IT services provider specializing in digital, cloud and automation across a comprehensive portfolio of consulting, applications, infrastructure and business process services. We are part of the NTT family of companies, a partner to 85 % of the Fortune 100.

NTT DATA Services is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, gender, disability, age, veteran-status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other class protected by law.

INDAPPS

Nearest Major Market: Louisville
Job Segment:
Database, Consulting, Developer, Mainframe, Oracle, Technology,Job Description
Support multiple lines of business including bankruptcy claims trading and insurance commission financing
Monitor and approve weekly funding of insurance commission financing along with developing metrics to monitor and measure principal risk exposure and profitability timeline
Collaborate with Insurance IMOs to set up data analysis and reporting standards to improve visibility of key performance metrics and risk factors
Perform financial analysis on new projects to forecast financial metrics such as IRR, cash flow and profitability
Construct SQL queries to gather large datasets on marketing revenue and effectiveness history to create insights on future marketing strategies and generate forecasts on marketing revenue
Supervise data collection efforts by Sales Assistant and members of the diligence team as well as direct Sales Assistant by identifying viable leads in bankruptcy cases
Conduct analysis and reporting on revenue forecasts, trader performance, diligence team performance, etc. to evaluate and improve company efficiency/profitability and business intelligence
Design and update company database using MSSQL
Design business processes to streamline and optimize daily business tasks
Collaborate with software developers to implement proprietary business tools for daily trading and diligence operations
Design and compose marketing campaigns to effectively reach out to prospective leads.
*

Reach out to us for more details (609)-795-3901 (or) Mail parvez(@)precisiontechcorp.com

Reviews: Glass door: https://lnkd.in/ePyq7pM

My Visa Jobs https://lnkd.in/e9ZpD5J

Inc. 5000 Press Release https://lnkd.in/eqttaa4

Required Experience and Qualifications

Eligibility:

>>Masters/Bachelors in CS/IT/CIS/MIS/MBA

>>Experience:1-2 Years relevant experience.

>>Excellent written and verbal communications:

Reach out to us for more details (609)-795-3901 (or) Mail parvez(@)precisiontechcorp.com,Category: Business Analyst
Location: Grapevine, Texas

Great opportunity for a Data Analyst to work with a leading global manufacturer located in Grapevine, TX! Employment: Full-Time/Direct-Hire Salary Expectation: $70K to $80K Location: Grapevine, TX Position Summary: The Data Analyst provides analytical and technical suppo...


Details Apply,REQUIREMENT Data Science- Security Analyst Dalla,TX Full Time Key Qualifications Bachelor of Science in Computer Science, SystemComputer Engineering, Data Science and Machine Learning, Cyber-Security, or Information Security is Needed Strong mathematical background (linear algebra, probability and statistics). Previous work experience in Cyber Security field is a Must Excellent oral, written, and presentation communication skills required. RESPONSIBILITIES AND QUALIFICATIONS Responsible for the creation of innovative methodologies for extracting key parameters from big data originating from various sensors. Utilize expertise in machine learning, statistical data analytics, and predictive analytics to help implement analytics tied to cyber security and hunting methodologies and applications Design, develop, test and deliver complex analytics in a range of programming environments on large data sets Apply latest technologies in machine learning, data mining, and predictive analytics to correlate the big datasets and events, and derive dynamic cybersecurity rules. Generate highly accurate and near real-time security alerts based on the dynamic rules. Collaborate with a global team to continually operate and improve a world-class cyber program by driving the uplift of sensory tools, detection tuning, and access to data sources to increase detection effectiveness by applying data analytics. Basic Qualifications Strong English verbal and written communication skills. Ability to multi-task and prioritize work effectively. Highly motivated self-starter who can provide thought leadership in big data analytics. Responsive to challenging tasks Ability to document and explain technical details in a concise and understandable manner. Strong sense of ownership and driven to manage tasks to completion. Minimum 3 years full time work and post graduate work experience 5 yearsrsquo experience with scalable distributed data processing, management, and visualization tools (e.g. Hadoop, Apache Spark, etc.). Proven hands on industry leading scripting tools such as Python, Powershell, R and SQL Excellent Communication is a MUST ABOUT eDataForce "eDataForce Consulting LLC is a results-driven, professional services company. We understand strategy, technology, and process. Our experienced professionals collaborate with clients to activate and accelerate critical business initiatives in three key ways Develop actionable business and technology strategies Optimize existing business process and technology investments Implement knowledgeinformation sharing technologies". Please contact your "eDataForce " recruiter (Ms. TAS) for immediate consideration. Phone 972.890.9270 OR e-Mail ejobsedataforce.com mailtoejobsedataforce.com,What you'll do
Data Analyst
Strong SQL ad Data Savvy.
Mortgage exp is mandatory

Location Coppell TX

BR - $55/hr.

What you bring

While others say it, we do it: we care. We have great people and we do great work. Just as importantly, we have great relationships with an impressive clientele. Over 1,000 talented, diverse, and career-minded professionals are carving out their role and experiencing a good mix of challenges and opportunities and we're rooting for them along the way, every day. For more, click: https://www.mindteck.com/career/life-at-mindteck.html
Mindteck is an Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, religion, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, status as a protected veteran, status as a qualified individual with a disability, or any other trait protected by law.,Job Title:

System Analyst (Big Data/Hadoop)


Job Duties:
1-3 years of Systems Analysis or Consulting experience (consulting between the business and a technical team, serving as a liaison)
1-3 years of Experience breaking down requirements into Feature Level requirements and User Stories in an Agile environment
1-3 years of Experience in data management functions (e.g., data warehousing, ETL, business intelligence, Big Data (Hadoop preferred), cloud infrastructure)
* Designing efficient and robust Hadoop solutions for performance improvement and end-user experiences.
* Working in a Hadoop ecosystem implementation/administration, installing software patches along with system upgrades and configuration.
Proficiency with MS Office applications including Visio
Demonstrated ability to achieve goals in a matrix environment
Demonstrated ability to work collaboratively and influence others
Effectively communicate at all levels of the organization
Experience working with Manager level and above to define problems and priority of work


Education Required:

Masters or its foreign equivalent in Computer Science or related subject.,Role: Network Data Analyst
Location: Dallas, TX
Type: Contract

Key Responsibilities / Functions:
Visualization familiarity with Tableau, PowerBI and/or other similar tool.
Analyze large, complex, multi-dimensional data sets with a variety of analytic methods (math, statistics, machine learning, etc.) and software tools (e.g. scripting in Python, R)
Select model type, algorithms and features to optimize the accuracy of prediction/decision
Build, evaluate, and evolve machine learning models and advanced analytics as new data is available, interpretation accuracy is scored, and usage broaden and adapts
SQL database tools
Good understanding of Telecom Mobile and Wireless Data Network architecture
Required Minimum Qualifications: (Education, Technical Skills/Knowledge)
Bachelor´s degree or equivalent experience required, candidates with Bachelor's degree in economics, statistics, engineering or computer science from a reputable institution will be a plus.
At least 7 years of experience in IT or Telecommunication
Experience in data science field
Proven experience with advanced analytic methods, from mathematics, statistical modeling to machine learning methods
Ability to absorb broad ideas and break down into meaningful minimum value product deliveries
Coding: Python, R
Familiar with database technologies and query languages
Good understanding of Telecom Mobile and Wireless Data Network architecture
Effective communication in English (written and verbal),Description:
Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures. Extracts and analyzes data from various sources, including databases, manual files, and external websites. Responds to data inquiries from various groups within an organization. Creates and publishes regularly scheduled and ad hoc reports. Documents reporting requirements and processes and validates data components as required. Requires experience with relational databases and knowledge of query tools and/or statistical software.Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential. Years of Experience: 2 - 5. Experience: Relies on some experience to plan and accomplish tasks. Leadership/Contributions: May lead junior resources. Reports to: Manager. Advanced Degree or Certifications?: Maybe.

Role Requirements:
PIM/Plumslice (1 Onsite 1 Offshore)
Strong experience in Data Migration, PIM and MDM experience. For onsite we need more experienced hands on candidate who can work with other internal testers supporting this initiative.

End Date : 9th Sep

Skill Set Needed:

Strong in Data Integration and Bulk Data Validation (Functional Performance)
Testing Knowledge in End to End integration of Product Data and integrations
Experience in Plumslice or IBM PIM is strong plus.
Strong in SQL and PLSQL
Experience in testing integration layers like ETL, XML Validations
Experience of Test Design, Test Planning, Test Execution, Defect Management and UAT support,Company Description

ClientSolv Technologies is an IT solution firm with over a decade of experience serving Fortune 1000 companies, public sector and small to medium sized companies. ClientSolv Technologies is a woman-owned and operated company that is certified as a WMBE, 8a firm by the Federal government's Small Business Administration.

Job Description

Title: Data Analyst

Start Date: asap
Duration: 6 months Contract to hire (will definitely convert to fulltime after contract )
City, State & Zip Code: Remote /Travel during Contract & then move to Everett, WA upon conversion to fulltime

Travel to Dallas PA or Ft Wayne IN during the contract (if it is allowed due to COVID 19 and eventually they are looking move to Everett, WA upon conversion to Full-time.

We are seeking a Junior level Data Systems Analyst with SQL expertise for a contract-to-hire opportunity.

Top Skills
2-3 years of experience
Hands-on SQL experience -writing scripts and queries
Data entry into the Master data systems.
Workings systems and users
Has direct responsibility to the systems Menus, Access Control, Users, Peripherals, Security and Database entry/integrity.

Qualifications
Required experience – Minimum 3 years’ experience or equivalent in IT administration
Familiarity with a broad range of IT technologies and Software Solutions. i.e. Service Desk and Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Software Platforms.
Familiarity with 3rd party cloud environments
Ability to thrive in a highly fast-paced, team-based organization
Strong attention to detail and documentation with ability to analyze information and develop a comprehensive work plan
Demonstrated problem solving, conflict resolution, time management, organizational and priority setting skills
Provides leadership by exhibiting influence and expertise
Ability to lead and work in remote team across time zones.
Some travel to attend Training, business-related meetings & conferences
Occasional weekend work if projects or assignments necessitate activity when workers are out of the office and may have to work off-hours if there are critical problems requiring IT intervention
Experience with Microsoft Office365 (Preferred)
Knowledge of any of the application functions (Payroll, HR, AP, Supply Chain, Billing, Inventory, Financials, property management, fleet management) (required)
Knowledge of SQL commands and functions: 3 - 5 years (Preferred)
Additional Information

This 6 months CTH role.

2 round of phone interview.,Must Have Skills: Hadoop, Hive, Spark, Kafka, Storm

Desired Skills: Experience working with GDPR or CCPA implementation or compliance related programs.

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,"PL/SQL and SQL, to debug, understand and identify the issues which come up day to day. b. 1. Have strong communication & Analytical skills who can articulate very well with business and cross functional teams. 2. Candidate should know how the system works from integration perspective . For example : Systems will communicate via REST API, messengers , dB links etc.. 3. Communicating to India team's with crystal clear explanation without any confusion. 4. MDM knowledge and Prior to Cisco experience would be great advantage to candidate. 5. Person should be in a position to debug the issue if we countered any issues while integrating with other systems. 6. Having Java , SQL , PL/SQL , REST API from integration perspective ,etc., who can quickly understand & debug the code."LTI values diversity and inclusion and is committed to the principles of Equal Employment Opportunity EEO/Minority/Female/Veteran/Disabled/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity."Nearest Major Market: San JoseNearest Secondary Market: Palo AltoJob Segment: Database, SQL, Developer, Java, Cisco, Technology,Data Analyst
10744
Menlo Park, CA
6/2/2020 2:54:00 PM

Learning
Contractor - W2

Job Description
Responsibilities

Primary
Query data and provide reports/query results to stakeholders
Manage requests and priorities independently
Provide documentation of queries/inbound requests for future use in improving GBM’s data infrastructure
Create new or improve existing dashboards by adding new metrics to support Business Education and other teams within the company

Secondary
Communicate with internal stakeholders about dashboards, and provide support about which metrics are available and from where
Understand existing data policy restrictions and determine if queries are possible to run/share
Skills

Minimum Qualifications

· 4+ years of experience in analytics or similar field

· Advanced proficiency in SQL

· Experience problem solving and providing business insights and recommendations from data

· Ability to manage multiple concurrent projects and drive initiatives in a cross-functional environment

· Ability to communicate complex data issues to audiences of different levels of technical expertise

Preferred Qualifications

· Experience building out large data sets and pipelines

· Python or similar scripting experience

Education

Minimum Qualifications

· Bachelor’s degree in a technical focus area

Preferred Qualifications

· MBA or graduate degree in a quantitative field

Job Requirements,Join Joomag, one of the fastest growing digital publishing companies out there with over 500,000 publishers on board. The Marketing Data Analyst will use audience data to track campaign success, map user experiences, develop reports and dashboards that surface key learnings and frame up opportunities across the organization.

Responsibilities:
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in data sets of varying size and complexity. Lead efforts to resolve data quality issues by identifying root-cause errors and presenting potential solutions.
Explore marketing data using the following analytical techniques: customer profiling, segmentation analysis, data analysis and mining, and predictive statistical modeling.
Look for opportunities to automate portions of data collection and integration processes and/or capture data along different stages of the buyer journey.
Work with a cross functional team to improve the integration and dissemination of data and intelligence across the company.
Drive data-related tasks of marketing programs and campaigns daily. Ensure data integrity and quality, and adhere to all data sharing and customer privacy guidelines and regulations.
Track and analyze results and key metrics from direct and digital marketing campaigns. Evaluate and optimize effectiveness of marketing campaigns. Design reports and findings documents. Distribute and present reports and key findings.
Serve as subject matter expert to the marketing team on data trends innovation and trends that affect our industry, customers and prospects.
Interpret the needs of cross-departmental partners and present relevant analytical approaches to support or satisfy those needs.
Provide recommendations for the structure and use of marketing data and project management for the use these recommendations across departments and function
Requirements
2-4 years’ experience in data analysis and database management.
Expert level knowledge working in SQL required.
Experience working with relational databases and report generation utilizing SQL required.
Demonstrated analytical and problem solving skills.
Experience with data management, KPI analysis and management information systems
Ability to manage data on a tactical basis, while also delivering strategic insights and direction
Excellent written and oral communication skills.
Benefits
Permanent Full-Time Position
401(k)
Medical/Vision/Dental Plans
PTO
Perks! Monthly Happy Hours and Convention/Expo Opportunities,Job Title: Data Analyst (SQL,Hive)
Location: Menlo Park
Duration: 1 year

Summary:
The data analyst will be responsible for building reporting and dashboards, and act as a knowledgeable liaison between technical teams and business stakeholders.
The ideal candidate has experience with building data pipelines and dashboards and will be comfortable working through ambiguity by using data.
This is a contractor role for a year and is located in our Menlo Park office.

Responsibilities
Create data tools that track key indicators and unlock insights for performance
Developing dashboards and pipelines to allow for quick and accurate data access and reporting across different lines of business
Define key metrics and provide analytical support, KPIs visibility, and business trends/drivers support via SQL, reporting and data visualization tools
Communicate with cross-functional stakeholders, including Product, Engineering, and business stakeholders, to drive dashboard design and key metrics analysis
Be a key point of contact for business stakeholders on all questions & related requests
Minimum Qualifications

BA or BS degree
2+ years of experience working in an analytical capacity developing
2+ insights, defining metrics, and making recommendations
SQL experience (Oracle, Vertica, Hive, etc.) or relational database experience (Oracle, MySQL) including developing data pipelines and reporting automation
Experience building data visualization tools and pipelines on large datasets and multiple data sources to create compelling, actionable reporting and dashboards like Tableau
Experience in financial modeling, ROI analysis, data analysis, and experience seeing beyond numbers to drive sound decision-making from complex datasets
Proven stakeholder management experience including multiple cross-functional
Presentation and communications experience with extracting insights from technical data sets to varied audiences including communicating with senior management
Preferred Qualifications

2+ years of experience with packages such as Python, R, SAS, etc
Experience with creating dashboards forecasting

Required Skills:
HIVE
DATA ANALYSIS
TABLEAU SOFTWARE
SQL
DATA VISUALIZATION
Additional Skills:
METRICS
RELATIONAL DATABASE
DATASETS
FINANCIAL MODELING
FORECASTING
MYSQL
ORACLE
PYTHON
ROI
SAS
TABLEAU
VERTICA
VISUALIZATION
DATA ANALYST
DATABASES
LIAISON
MARKETING ANALYSIS
SERIAL ATTACHED SCSI

IND123,Title: Data Analyst (German)
Location: Cupertino, CA
Duration: 6 Months +
10474944

Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling. Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus. Reporting and presentation skills a must. Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers. The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions. Work closely with the Data Anlytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven markeitng reports. " Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
" Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
" Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
" Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
" Filter and "clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
" Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
" Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.
*Candidates MUST be fluent in German**
Skills:
MacOS
iOS
0 - 2 years of experience.

Education:
Bachelor's Degree or equivalent work experience preferred.

Required Skills:
DATA ANALYST,Analyze, document and design data objects, data quality rules, and data quality tests to be landed and executed. Create resilient, and sustainable and Data Object Designs and Data Quality Rules. Be a product-oriented Data Analyst creating and experimenting with new ideas that will engage and excite our customers ExperienceSkills required - Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or related technical field. MSPhD would be a strong plus. - 3+ years experience in Data Design, Dimensional Modelling, Teradata, HiveQL, Hadoop HDFS, Confluence, Jira. - Strong understanding of data design techniques and principles - Strong leadership and communication skills - Must be able to work effectively both on teams as well as be self-motivated, task oriented and organized. - Strong customer focus and obsession with quality - Ability to work in a fast-paced and agile development environment,????????????????????????Hi Folks ,

Greetings from Logic Planet,

We are pleased t introduce you Logic Planet as a leading recruitment and staffing company,

Regarding I have an exciting new opportunity???s that I wanted to share with you and your network. Our top client, located San Jose, CA is currently seekingData Analyst Joins their organization. I have included a complete job description below in case you or someone you know might be interested in learning more


Job Title: Data Analyst
Location: San Jose, CA 95101
Work Authorizations: Authorized to Work, Citizen, Green Card, H4-EAD,
Position Type: Full Time
No: of Positions: 1
Duration: 6 + months

Job Description:

??? Define, measure and track key metrics to guide execution across multiple teams in the org
??? Build dashboards and reports for teams and business leaders and stakeholders to promote transparency and enable smart decisions
??? Build qualitative and quantitative models to deepen understanding of platform operational performance, and predict potential delivery risks
??? Leverage analytics to drive process improvement
??? Communicate in clear and concise manner for actionable changes focused on improving velocity, predictability, and efficiency

Qualifications :

??? 7+ years' experience in data analysis within tech industry

??? Technical expertise in data modeling, system and data base design development, and data mining techniques

??? Proficient in writing SQL queries on SQL Server, MySQL , Oracle.

??? Strong experience working on Business Intelligence tools: Power BI is a MUST, Tableau desired.

??? Need to have experience in creating calculated measures and columns with DAX in Power BI Desktop. (Aggregate, Date, Logical, String, Level of Detail etc)

??? Expert in setting up the necessary connection details and scheduling reports on Power BI Report Server, providing row level security, creating bookmarks etc.
??? Strong knowledge of programming/scripting language highly desirable
??? Strong analytical skills and detail oriented: ability to get to the root cause of problems and devise an analytical approach to reach actionable answers

Regards,

Vinay

Logic Planet Inc
4525 Route 27,Princeton, NJ 08540

Ph: 732 512 0009 Ext: 134 Direct : 609 256 4342
Email: vinay@logicplanet.com | www.logicplanet.com

Certified Minority Women Based Enterprise

18 years in IT. 300 employees. $30M in revenues,Data Analyst
San Jose, CA
Fulltime

Job Description:-

Key Responsibilities
• Define, measure and track key metrics to guide execution across multiple teams in the org
• Build dashboards and reports for teams and business leaders and stakeholders to promote transparency and enable smart decisions
• Build qualitative and quantitative models to deepen understanding of platform operational performance, and predict potential delivery risks
• Leverage analytics to drive process improvement
• Communicate in clear and concise manner for actionable changes focused on improving velocity, predictability, and efficiency

Qualifications
• 7+ years' experience in data analysis within tech industry
• Technical expertise in data modeling, system and data base design development, and data mining techniques
• Proficient in writing SQL queries on SQL Server, MySQL , Oracle.
• Strong experience working on Business Intelligence tools: Power BI is a MUST, Tableau desired.
• Need to have experience in creating calculated measures and columns with DAX in Power BI Desktop. (Aggregate, Date, Logical, String, Level of Detail etc)
• Expert in setting up the necessary connection details and scheduling reports on Power BI Report Server, providing row level security, creating bookmarks etc.
• Strong knowledge of programming/scripting language highly desirable
• Strong analytical skills and detail oriented: ability to get to the root cause of problems and devise an analytical approach to reach actionable answers

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Job Description
Hi

Hope you are doing great
Please go through the below JD and let me know your Interest

Job Role : Data Analyst

Location : Santa Clara, CA

Description/ Required Skills:

We are currently looking for a Data Analyst with 9 plus years of experience.
Candidate must have banking experience.
Can write BRD and FRD with UAT testing.
8+ years of Data Analytics experience with Data Mapping, Data Lineage.
Must have 8+ years of Informatician and SQL experience.
AWS is nice to have.
The Data Analyst will gather data from Various lines of business and transfer from the Data Lake to the AWS cloud platform.
They will be required to complete the data lineage, data quality, and data mapping to ensure that none of the data is lost in the transfer.,Sunnyvale, California
Skills : Data Analyst,SQL,Data Pipeline
Description :
Position Description

Development and maintenance support for key data infrastructure supporting the Chrome OS GTM team, specifically the channel/customer sales teams. The Analyst will have very strong SQL skills, strong time management and self-direction, be comfortable cleaning up tech debt and maintaining pipelines, strong attention to detail, and strong documentation skills.

Top 3 Daily Responsibilities

Skill/Experience/Education

Mandatory

1-3 years developing SQL workflows.
Project management experience.
Must be a strong self-directed contributor.


Data Analyst,SQL,Data Pipeline,Job Description
Commerce Data Analyst Contractor

The data analyst will be responsible for building reporting and dashboards, and act as a knowledgeable liaison between technical teams and business stakeholders. The ideal candidate has experience with building data pipelines and dashboards and will be comfortable working through ambiguity by using data. This is a contractor role for a year and is located in our Menlo Park office.

Responsibilities
Create data tools that track key indicators and unlock insights for performance
Developing dashboards and pipelines to allow for quick and accurate data access and reporting across different lines of business
Define key metrics and provide analytical support, KPIs visibility, and business trends/drivers support via SQL, reporting and data visualization tools
Communicate with cross-functional stakeholders, including Product, Engineering, and business stakeholders, to drive dashboard design and key metrics analysis
Be a key point of contact for business stakeholders on all questions & related requests
Minimum Qualifications
BA or BS degree
2+ years of experience working in an analytical capacity developing insights, defining metrics, and making recommendations
SQL experience (Oracle, Vertica, Hive, etc.) or relational database experience (Oracle, MySQL) including developing data pipelines and reporting automation
Experience building data visualization tools and pipelines on large datasets and multiple data sources to create compelling, actionable reporting and dashboards like Tableau
Experience in financial modeling, ROI analysis, data analysis, and experience seeing beyond numbers to drive sound decision-making from complex datasets
Proven stakeholder management experience - including multiple cross-functional
Presentation and communications experience with extracting insights from technical data sets to varied audiences including communicating with senior management
Preferred Qualifications
2+ years of experience with packages such as Python, R, SAS, etc
Experience with creating dashboards forecasting,Business Data Analyst (W2 ONLY) San Jose ,CA 5-7 + Years of Experience Tableau not development but accessing datamanipulatinganalyzing (MUST HAVE) Not a tableau developer But this person will be working with the tableau developer team in India Data validation Connecting with end users User acceptance testing User team creates these dashboards and this person will validate it before it gets published Query databases SQL (MUST HAVE) Will handle any troubleshootingenhancement requests Will need to focus on what the user is trying to accomplish customers are internal employees from the following teams Customer success Account managers System engineers Sales India team that's doing development Adhoc requests for data Admin level responsibilities for certain SAAS tools such as Gainsight agrave only about 10-15 of the role (MUST HAVE SAAS TOOL ADMIN LEVEL EXPERIENCE) Nice to have Python Regards, Rahul Bobbili 9254759970rbobbilibayone.com,Title : Data AnalystLocation : Cupertino, CA

Duration : Long Term Contract

Job Description:

• Candidates MUST be fluent in German
• Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling.
• Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus.

Job Requirements:

• Reporting and presentation skills a must.
• Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers.
• The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions.
• Work closely with the Data Analytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven marketing reports.
• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
• Filter and "clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

ZJlKPZrorO,Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling. Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus. Reporting and presentation skills a must. Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers. The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions. Work closely with the Data Anlytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven markeitng reports. Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports. Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality. Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems. Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets. Filter and clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems. Work with management to prioritize business and information needs. Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.
*Candidates MUST be fluent in German**
MacOS
iOS
0 - 2 years of experience.,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

SfTXVuhhoM,Hello,

Â

Title

Supply Chain Data Analyst

Location

San Jose, CA

Qualification

Bachelor's degree or equivalent in SCM, business, economics or equivalent

Experience

7+ years

Salary

Market standards

Skills

5 years or more experience in related fields, inventory management or SCM

Working knowledge of the supply chain, manufacturing policies and processes as they relate to inventory

Can 'mine' various data sources to create a 'picture' of the current and future inventory position

Strong analytical skills with an ability to resolve issues in effective/practical ways

Knowledge of ERP systems

Knowledge of SAP - SmartOps or IBP â I

Identify root causes and present solutions

Knowledge of Tableau or any other visualization tools

Collect data through interviews, surveys, web search, database search, or other methods

Synthesize and analyze information from various sources to identify trends, opportunities, and dangers,Role Objective

To audit ads that consist of visual, text and audio per shared guidelines. The ads will be usable for the client's ad network and are viewed by our users/advertisers. Therefore it calls for consistent accuracy and an excellent review.

Data Analyst will provide feedback to client's relevant parties, therefore high quality deliverables are expected.

Responsibilities:
Ensure a logical and meaningful review of Ad(visual/text/audio) and URL content
Deliver high quality content review consistently and accurately
Proofread, review and edit documents for accurate use of grammar and content
Provide feedback of reviewed data
Skills/Qualifications
Excellent analytical skills such as attention to detail
Excellent communication skills (both written & oral)
Ability to produce high quality work
Flexible and highly motivated
Team player
Time management skills: must be able to perform tasks quickly and accurately
Linguistic skills should include morphology and syntax (correct grammatical, spelling, typographical, or compositional errors, but also include the ability to 'play' with words)
Excellent organizational skills
High proficiency in English
Excellent technical skills
Required: Professional fluency in both speaking, reading and writing in the supported language and English
Preferred Attributes:
Knowledge of Google Adwords/Ad products is a plus
Advanced degree in Linguistics, Marketing/Communication etc.,Here are the job details:

Title: Data Quality Analyst
Location: Mountain View, CA
Duration: 6+ Months

Description:
As an Associate Data Steward and Sales Planning Analyst, you will:
Provide first level support for basic account inquiries and account maintenance requests. Triage, assess, and resolve account issues per documented processes.
Conduct initial root cause analysis and provide recommendations for process improvements. Assist in the development of methodologies and procedures to continually monitor, enhance, and improve customer/account data quality and integrity.
Liaise with SFDC users and with cross-functional teams to resolve data discrepancies.
Participate in any user acceptance testing for SFDC enhancement implementations.

What you bring to the team:
A minimum of 2-3 years of experience.
A passion for data quality. A methodical approach to problem-solving with an eye towards process repeatability and automation.
Familiarity with SFDC and the Sales Process.
Hands-on experience with data analysis and reporting tools, such as Tableau.
Experience with data cleansing, data profiling and validation techniques.
Experience with Data ETL and data wrangling tools a plus.
Experience with ServiceNow a plus.

Requirements:
A minimum of 2-3 years of experience.
A passion for data quality. A methodical approach to problem-solving with an eye towards process repeatability and automation.
Familiarity with SFDC and the Sales Process.
Hands-on experience with data analysis and reporting tools, such as Tableau.
Experience with data cleansing, data profiling and validation techniques.
Experience with Data ETL and data wrangling tools a plus.
Experience with ServiceNow a plus.,OverviewMilestone Technologies, Inc. is a leading IT Managed Services and IT Professional Services solutions provider headquartered in the Bay Area and serving clients globally. Our unique approach to IT Managed Services includes Contact Center Services, Internal IT Support, Data Center Operations, Workforce Solutions, and IT Professional Services.Our unique approach to IT Managed Services includes Contact Center Services, Internal IT Support, Data Center Operations, Workforce Solutions, and IT Professional Services.* Please note for this role working onsite at this client location is required Mon-Fri.ResponsibilitiesDrive data accuracy and consistency across teams by identifying gaps and issues in data sources and dashboards.Organize project charters, scorecards, and other documentation for the overall roadmap.Generate monthly reporting and ad hoc analysis to support leadership decision-making.Drive data annalistic projects from initial ask, score definition, testing, development, deployment, and support.Gather and document requirements from cross-functional teams and projects and align on visualization expectations. Coordinate data analytics requests from business partners and IT.Data mining of multiple audit and compliance findings to generate standardized corrective action and management of vendor tool. Analyze data for corrective action, create and manage tasks through completion.Ability to extrapolate data from multiple sources of information, and understand its value.Track metrics on multiple discipline levels within the team.Create platform(s) and tools for the organization to leverage.Continually improve and automate existing methods for parsing data and incorporating into real-time models, analysis, and actions.Write queries, perform ad hoc data analysis, and create data visualizations to keep the nerve center of our operations engine running at full speed.Build best practices of marrying financial and operational data. Data sources include MS Excel, SQL, internal forecasting and planning tools.Build dashboards and visualization of complete data sets and calculations.Design and develop analytics and data visualizations that help Team make data-driven decisions.Support efforts to develop core data sets that empower operational analyses.Drive efforts to analyze, visualize, and provide analytics on data to build reporting solutions to support department-wide, regional, and global iniatives. Proactively develop new metrics to identify trends in all regions of operations.QualificationsExperience:5 - 7+ years experience in data analytics.Strong analytical and critical thinking skills.Written and verbal communication skills.Development experience in at least one scripting language (R or Python) required.Systems:Proficient with Tableau, MS Excel, SQL (Oracle, Hive, MySQL) and other analytical applications. Working SQL experience.Working Tableau experience for developing data visuals.Education:Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Statistics, Math, Engineering, Business and/or 5+ years of work experience in the field.Additional Requirements:Security:* Programs: CCure, Genetech Facilities:* Understanding of Real Estate, Facility or Transportation Operations. Financial:* Understanding and working knowledge of US GAAP and Accounting processing.* Job description is subject to change.Milestone Technologies provides equal employment opportunity for all applicants and employees. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment and will not be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, gender identity, marital status, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, national origin, or any other category protected by applicable federal and state law, or local ordinance. Milestone also makes reasonable accommodations for disabled applicants and employees.#LI-AT1,PaymentsFinanceAccounting Industry Background Great communication skills. Experience working with Agile Methodology. Background Working knowledge of Hadoop Development Platform. Excellent Data Analysis skills. Must be comfortable with querying and analyzing large amount of data on Hadoop HDFS using Hive and Spark. Excellent collaborative and influencing skills. Must be able to work with teams of Data Engineers and Analysts and resolve dependencies. 6+ years of experience in Reporting Analytics Knowledge in Financial accounting is preferred. Sashini Dissanayake Technical Recruiter Technosoft Corporation One Towne Square, Suite 600 Southfield, MI 48076 Direct 248 603 2612 Mobile +1 248 631 9330 www.technosoftcorp.com httpwww.technosoftcorp.com,Title Master Data AnalystStart Date ImmediatelyRate NegotiableDuration 6 MonthsLocation San Jose, CAResponsibilities Develop master data creationupdate processes for core master data objects (customer, vendor, material) and core financial data objects (profit center, cost center, fixed asset, GL accounts etc.) Run workshops with cross-functional groups to define, review approve processes Define a shared service model to maintain master data Onboard and train offshore team Operationalize MDM support including escalation performance monitoring Education Experience Undergraduate degree in Statistics, Engineering, Computer Sciences, Finance, Accounting, or related field 3+ years of business experience with financial operations and reporting processes Minimum 3 years of experience in master data management practices. Ability to engage and communicate at the manager level and above to provide clear, concise explanations of data governance concepts, programs and initiatives Demonstrable experience working within complex, federated data and system architecture Experience working both automated and non-automated master data operations models Desired Skills Prior experience of implementing SAP MDG (as part of an S4 implementation) Working experience in SAP Data Services and Information Steward Experience with Salesforce (SFDC) master data Design and use of Google Forms, ServiceNow, or similar for change management Workshop planning leadership Prior experience with matchmerge and survivorship rules for master data Process mapping, data cataloging Understanding and use of process metrics to monitor and maintain the effectiveness of operations Please apply through our on-line portal with your resume and contact information. Applications will be reviewed and assessed against position requirements. Qualified candidates will be contacted by the lead recruiter within 48 hours of submittal. No phone calls please. You may also apply for this position by mail. Send your cover letter and resume to Corporate StaffingMethod360 Inc.1 Post Street, Suite 550San Francisco, CA 94104 Method360 is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer,Location: San Jose, California

Position Description

We are seeking 5 market data analysts to join our team
to provide validation, cleansing, and management of global reference and market data to financial institutions including security, pricing, and corporate action data. We provide first level of support for our client’s referential and historical data which is used by traders, developers, and other end-users.

GSM addresses the challenges facing financial institutions in the reference data management arena. GSM delivers data management, verification and research services for all reference data asset classes and data types that are used and processed by financial institutions. We manage data for all traded asset classes, including fixed income, global equities, derivatives, money markets, and OTC instruments. We cover all data types such as client/counterparty, legal entity hierarchy, descriptive data, pricing, and corporate actions. GSM manages data from original acquisition through validation, cleansing, enrichment, enhancement, and maintenance - to ensure the highest quality data.

Key Responsibilities
Market Data Research
Daily interaction with Market Data vendors;
Research and correction of global securities, price, and corporate action data;
Develop pro-active checks to ensure the problems are handled before they reach the users community; and
Maintain the integrity of multiple data sources and data sets
Client Support
Perform special requested projects;
Provide ad-hoc research/support on all client and management inquires;
Apply ad-hoc adjustments to client data sets to reflect corporate actions; and
Interface with traders, end-users, and developers to resolve data and system problems.
Requirements
Experience in similar role for a financial institution a plus
College degree or equivalent work experience with emphasis in financial services
Knowledge about securities including equities and fixed income
Detail oriented
Time management skills
Ability to multi-task
Dedicated and responsible
Some familiarity with program scripting a plus
Strong organizational and people skills
Ability to work independently and in a team environment

Apply in confidence by emailing resume with a cover letter to careers@sraoss.com.,Hi

Hope you are doing great
Please go through the below JD and let me know your Interest

Technical Business/Data Analyst
Location: Santa Clara, CA or Phoenix, AZ

Duration : 12+month contract

Only W2
We are currently looking for a Business/Data Analyst with 10 plus years of experience. Required Skills:
Candidate must have banking experience.
10+ years of business/Data Analytics experience with Data Mapping, Data Lineage with strong SQL and UAT testing experience.
Must have 10+ years of Informatician and SQL experience.
AWS is nice to have.
The Business/Data Analyst will Create SQL Queries to pull the data than transfer the data from Data Lake to the AWS cloud.
Use SQL Queries to gather data from Various lines of business and transfer from the Data Lake to the AWS cloud platform.
They will be required to complete the data lineage, data quality, and data mapping to ensure that none of the data is lost in the transfer. Than the BA/DA will complete the UAT and Data Validation testing.,We are looking for Sr. Data AnalystEngineer to support a Finance initiative for a leading technology company in San Jose, CA. Experience in requirements gathering, Data Analysis and building pipelines using ETL solutions such as Python and SQL. Expert level understanding in Data models, Complex SQLs, ETLELT ingestion methods. Experience in AWS Cloud platforms and databases such as Snowflake, Redshift Conversant with business users, business processes and SaaS applications such as Salesforce, etc. 8+ years experience developing complex SQL 3+ years experience programming in Python Experience in Agile methodology (2+ years),Zoom is an award-winning workplace. We have been recognized by Comparably as #1 CEO, Company Happiness, Benefits, Compensation, Diversity, and more! Not to mention we've been awarded by Glassdoor as the 2nd Best US workplace & Best Large Company US CEO in 2018, Wealthfront, and Business Insider. Our culture focuses on delivering happiness, our commitment to transparency, and the tangible benefits we provide our employees and our customers.Our Ideal CandidateYou have excellent communication, organizational, time management and analytical skills. You have a positive, "can do" attitude, who is ready to jump in, connect the dots, and make things happen. You excel in a fast-paced environment and exceed goals. When something isn't working, you shift gears quickly, and come up with a new approach and renewed energy to tackle any challenge. You have a strong inclination of building standard, simple and fully automated processes. This position will be part of the revenue team located in San Jose.Responsibilities* Have a good understanding of the order-to-cash process and information flows* Support future strategic initiatives as the order-to-cash systems SME* Build and maintain various financial performance (example: revenue) and reconciliation models to support financial reporting* Analyze and interpret huge data sets to support accounting conclusions (ASC 606 standalone selling price)* Support revenue reporting, billing, and finance operation initiatives in planning, execution and impact measuring* Build/modify/maintain dashboards, SQL queries, and reports to regularly communicate results, monitor key metrics, perform analytics, and automate manual processes in scalable waysRequirements* Bachelor's Degree in Business/Economics, STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) Degrees or similar fields, accounting and data science backgrounds preferred* 5+ years of experience using data to facilitate business decisions; high growth, technology (B2B SaaS is a plus), management consulting, Big4 Accounting, or business intelligence background preferred* Experience with ASC 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers required* Excellent Excel skills required. SQL skills highly preferred.* Inherently curious and believe in the power of data to drive decisions* Strong communication and organization skills* Self-driven with the ability to work in a self-guided mannerZoom Video Communications Company Culture Highlights:* Winner of Comparably's Award for Best Company Work-Life Balance 2019* Winner of Comparably's Award for Best Company Compensation 2019* Winner of Comparably's Award for Best Company Happiness 2019* Winner of Comparably's Award for Best Company Perks & Benefits 2019* Sales Department is ranked in the top 5% of companies for Diversity on Comparably.* Zoom Video Communications is ranked in the top 5% of companies for Professional Development on Comparably.* Zoom Video Communications is ranked in the top 5% of companies for Overall Culture on Comparably.Check us out on Comparably: https://www.comparably.com/companies/zoom-video-communicationsGet an inside look at the San Jose office culture here: https://youtube/U8GMcBn9ecwCheck us out with a free download: zoom.us/download,Tachyon TechnologiesÂis a Digital Transformation consulting firm that partners with businesses to implement customer-focused business transformation. Aligned with SAP's digital core, Tachyon Technologies collaborates with its clients to transform their business by leveraging existing IT investments and leading-edge digital solutions to positively impact their customers' experience. From initiation through realization, Tachyon Technologies understands what it takes for a consulting partner to be effective and strives to deliver a meaningful solution that exceeds its clients' expectations.

Title:Data Analyst with Tableau/Power BI

Location:Sanjose,CA

Duration:12 Months

JD:

The Cloud Tech SLC Operations team is looking for a data visualization engineer who is passionate about data science, result-oriented, and can work independently in a fast-paced environment.
Key Responsibilities
â Define, measure and track key metrics to guide execution across multiple teams in the org
â Build dashboards and reports for teams and business leaders and stakeholders to promote transparency and enable smart decisions
â Build qualitative and quantitative models to deepen understanding of platform operational performance, and predict potential delivery risks
â Leverage analytics to drive process improvementÂ
â Communicate in clear and concise manner for actionable changes focused on improving velocity, predictability, and efficiency
Qualifications
â 5+ years' experience in data analysis within tech industry
â Technical expertise in data modeling, system and data base design development, and data mining techniques
â Hands on skills to retrieve and analyze data; strong knowledge of/experience with Jira and Tableau is a must
â Strong knowledge of programming/scripting language highly desirable
â Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
â Strong analytical skills and detail oriented: ability to get to the root cause of problems and devise an analytical approach to reach actionable answers

Disclaimer:ÂThe above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,Our clients Global Sales Analytics team is seeing a smart, dynamic, and strategic Senior Data Analyst to build and deploy dashboards and reporting to make data-driven decisions that enable our Field Organizations to maximize profitability. You should expect to support their BI infrastructure, manage consistent data flows among different data sources, and look into Data Quality issues and address them on a day to day basis. Our ideal candidate must have a background in both data management (Snowflake) and Analytics (Tableau) with some understanding of Go-To-Market operations. Responsibilities Leverage business intelligence tools including Tableau, Excel spreadsheets and SQL to create models and dashboards that can be leveraged with cross-functional teams to answer key business questions. Work with our Data Technology team to extract, transform, and load data from a wide variety of data sources. Understand Data Models and metadata to support ad-hoc and pre-built reporting. Own the maintenance of ongoing metrics, reports, analyses and dashboards etc. to drive key business decisions. Recognize and adopt best practices in reporting and analysis data integrity, test design, analysis, validation, and documentation. Analyze and solve problems at their root, stepping back to understand the broader context. Use data mining, model building, and other analytical techniques. Strong understanding of modern machine learning techniques and their mathematical concepts and real world application 3+ years of professional experience in data science or engineering around build and shipping machine learning or statistical models. Self-starter with a passion and curiosity for solving unstructured mathematical problems and ability to manipulate large data sets Expert SQL skills Strong visualization skills and experience with BI tools (ex Tableau, Looker, Domo) Outstanding quantitative background BS in Computer Science, Statistics, Math, Physics or other technical field preferred.,Title Sr. BI Business AnalystData Visualization Expert Location Initial Remote then Post Covid at San Jose CA. Rate Open AI ON W2 Duration 12 Months Start Date Immediate Position Type W2 Contract Note Client will not sponsor any Visa. Job Description Business AnalystData Visualization Expert Comfortable gathering and clearly documenting reporting requirements from key stakeholders Strong communication skills and experience working with technical and non-technical stakeholders to solve problems SaaS business analysis experience across multiple business functions (sales, marketing, product management, finance) 6-8 years advanced development experience with Tableau Desktop Demonstrated track record of creating insightful, intuitive, visually appealing report and dashboard content (need to see samples) Demonstrated track record of detecting data inconsistencies and working with other teams to change business processes, thereby improving data quality Demonstrated track record of taking initiative, breaking down roadblocks, working independently 3-5 years practical experience working with data warehouses and dimensional models 3-5 years practical experience writing advanced SQL,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

5eFpji9WRx,Job Description
Data Analyst

Strong analytic skills to build dashboards/visualizations + building ETL pipelines

Who/what we are looking for:
Excellent communicator (storytelling, reporting, insights presentations)
Strong SQL
Experience with visualization tools (Tableau, Looker or similar), building dashboards
Comfortable with programming (Data Handling)
Familiarity with building ETL pipelines
What they will be doing:
Designing KPIs for operations and internal tools
Building Dashboards – internal ops, management, PM, client facing
Research projects for operations,Job description Bachelorrsquos Degree 9 years of relevant experience Understanding and implementing best practices of data visualization data modeling Strong database Fundamentals and SQL, PLSQL. Teradata, SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, Hive, Cloudera Knowledge of ETL and expertise in BI tools, Power BI, Tableau, QlikSense, Qlikview, OBIEE, SAP BO Strong Tableau Administration and dashboard migration experience, Tableau upgrade experience Preferred Certification in any of the BI tool would be added advantage. RegardsFerveenSr.Technical RecruiterPh-315 995 4303emailferveencloudious.com mailtoemail3Aferveencloudious.com,Position Title: Senior Data Analyst / Data Warehouse Consultant
Note: Work Order will be awarded on an individual basis, based on the specific needs described herein.
Contract Term: 6 months with possibility of extension
Requesting Department: TSS
Schedule: Full-Time On-site All work hours will be at billed at the same base rate regardless of the number of hours worked per billing period.

Typical Tasks:
" Collaborates with vendors, administrators and owners of third-party databases to establish data mapping plans and methods, enabling the sharing of data;
" Develops computer testing and audit policies and assists end users in implementing auditing controls to ensure that defined, mission-critical interfaces are passing data accurately;
" Provides integration and interface design (data mapping, translation and transformation specifications) and architectural services for new and existing projects;
" Analyzes requirements from a technical standpoint and translates them into potential integration points, thereby defining the interface topology for the project;
" Coordinates and maintains electronic interface security;
" Develops data mapping, translation and transformation routines and methods utilizing interface engine toolset and standard query and database tools;
" Evaluates and tests emerging integration technologies
" Analyzes requirements and helps define integration and interface specifications;
" Builds, configures and maintains interfaces;
" Conducts testing of all mapping, translation and transformation routines prior to moving interfaces into production;
" Maintains technical artifacts, interface documentation, and topology diagrams;
" Performs analysis and troubleshooting of integration related issues;
" Maintains a library of all required standard vocabularies and nomenclatures used in normalizing inbound and outbound data feeds;
" Maintains test and production libraries of interfaces and applies appropriate methods, procedures and safeguards to protect the integrity of the interfaces and to ensure their recoverability;
" Performs other related duties as required.
Training and Experience: Sufficient education, training, and experience to demonstrate the possession and direct application of the following knowledge and abilities.
" 6 years of experience with systems integration and building interfaces
" Minimum of 3 years developing Service Development in Software AG webMethods required
" Familiarity working with an AGILE task management
" Technical writing experience a plus
" Strong analytical and quantitative skills
" Self-Motivated and can effectively multi-task
" Experience performance tuning, supporting, and troubleshooting software AG webMethods is plus

Possession of a Bachelor's degree from an accredited college in Computer Science, Information Technology, Mathematics, Engineering, or a related field

Knowledge of:
" Industry-specific systems, data manipulation and data transport mechanisms, standards, and protocols;
" Interface standards and protocols, including but not limited to HTML, ASCII;
" Inbound and outbound data integration involving XML, XSLT, JSON and other structured data being transmitted via FTP, API or web services;
" Electronic interface security;
" Data mapping, translation and transformation routines and methods;
" Interface engines and building interfaces on interface engines;
" Interface engines and platforms (i.e. Software AG WebMethods, NextGen Mirth, Corepoint, Orion, Infor, etc.)
" Requirements that define interface specifications;
" Building, configuring and maintaining interfaces;
" Interface testing;
" Technical artifacts, interface documentation, and topology diagrams;
" Analysis and troubleshooting of integration related issues;
" Methods, procedures and safeguards to protect the integrity of the interfaces and to ensure their recoverability.
" Quality of product and service
" Timeliness of performance
" Depth of knowledge
" Interpersonal and communication skills
" Project management skills
" Experience, qualifications, and ability to meet the needs of this engagement
On-Site Requirements: On-call help may be required.,Optima Global Solutions Inc.is a valuable IT Services and Solution provider that customers, employees, and stakeholders feel proud to be associated with. Optima's Intelligent Automation Solutions leverage robotic process automation, intelligent data capture, and business process management best practices to streamline operations. Our IT Services practice provides organizations with highly personalized, comprehensive, U.S. based recruiting services supported by our internal onsite team of subject matter experts.

Currently, we are hiring for the following position;

Senior Data Analyst/Data Warehouse Consultant

Interested candidates, please apply online with a detailed resume and contact information.

Thank you.,ob Position: SAP Sr Master Data Functional Analyst

Job Location: Santa Clara, CA

Mode of Hire: Long Term Contract

Detailed Job Description

Requirements
10-12 years of Functional Analyst Experience in SD /MM Modules
Understands Customer /Vendor/Material master data from the business and technical perspectives
Strong technical knowledge and understanding of SAP master data elements, processes, and Experience in Master Data Configuration
Minimum 6-7 years of Experience in Customer /Vendor/Material Master Data migration, Data migration Tools
Leads and performs Master data analysis, data cleansing through review process.
Knowledge on the BODS functionality , Master Data Governance processes
Executing Cutover Activities, Monitoring Data Extracts, Data Loads, analyzes data errors and resolves root causes.
Ability to write Functional and Tech Specifications , Test Scripts ,execute the test cycles
Working Knowledge on Idocs, Trouble shooting
Knowledge on SAP CRM and Master Data replication to SAP CRM or Cloud Applications like Sap Hybris is a major plus.
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Job Description:

The client is currently implementing a Performance Management visualization portal pilot and in the planning stage of a client Performance Management and Data Analytics system with a goal to accomplish the following:
Development and publication of project management documents and deliverables in compliance with client Framework directives.
Conduct an in-house assessment of client data analytics and reporting needs.
Creation of statements of work that clearly define the services and deliverables required of a vendor in support of the implementation of the data and analytics solution.
Obtainment of matching federal funds for this initiative through the development of federally approved IAPD(s).
Design, development, and implementation of client performance portal using an agile methodology for all standard SDLC phases that include, but not limited to:
Validation of performance metric requirements.
Creation of EPICS/User Stories.
Creation and validation of dashboard and report mock-ups.
Automation of data acquisition from a variety of data sources.
Dashboard and report development.
Testing – integration, load and stress, and user.
Deployment/publication internally and externally.
Operations support and enhancement of the Performance Portal pilot.
Responsibilities:
Collaboration with the Chief Data Architect and the client Office of the Chief Technology Officer on technology and tool recommendations.
Implementation and configuration of developmental tools.
Coordination of infrastructure build-out and on-going support.
Collaboration with other members of the Data Analytics Support Team, key stakeholders, other agencies, and third-party vendors.
Participation in requirements and design sessions as a member of an agile sprint team.
Skills and Qualifications:

Required:
8 years of Strong analytical and problem-solving skills with experience architecting data analytics, performance management system, or data warehousing projects.
7 years of experience in defining integrative views of data drawn together from many data sources across the enterprise, including file extracts and different relational databases as sources.
7 years of experience in designing semantic data views to help visualization developers understand and access data using common business terms.
4 years of Strong dimensional modeling skills and proficiency in using data modeling tools such as Erwin.
4 years of demonstrated ability in engaging and communicating with stakeholders, across both business and technology functions
2 years of experience on an agile sprint team, preferably with prior experience as a member of a sprint team.
1 year of experience with JIRA software.
Preferred:
8 years of excellent oral and written communication skills.
7 years of experience in Risk management skills.
4 years of effectively manage multiple responsibilities, prioritize conflicting assignments, and switch quickly between assignments, as required.
3 years of prior experience in the Healthcare Industry.
2 years of prior experience with a client-agency.
2 years of experience with state-of-the-art software components for performance metrics data visualization or business intelligence environment.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

uGS7Cx3dmy,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

dBytDC4pf7,Job Description

What you'll do:
Create and develop data classification/data quality rules for identification of Schwab's most sensitive data
Document user stories, requirements, and testing plans to support implementation of EDC application operating models to align with Data Governance Office requirements
Document design and perform testing to support metadata import and export jobs and creation of data governance reporting/KPIs
Oversee setup and design for classification of data for Schwab's enterprise applications
Adhere to SDLC policies and standards for technical management of the EDC platforms for Schwab
Support enterprise entities during data governance onboarding and utilization of EDC
Required skills:
2+ years of experience as a business system analyst working with data governance including 1+ years of recent experience in development of a data quality and/or data classification rules
3-5 years of data-centric IT work
Experience working in an Agile Scrum team environment
Ability to understand, translate, and communicate abstract concepts/ideas in a clear, concise, and easy to understand communication style
Must demonstrate analytical, problem solving, and research skills that allow working with problems that are complex and often unique
Preferred Skills:
Bachelor's degree in Business, Finance, Information Technology or a related field
Experience with Informatica Enterprise Data Catalog (or other technical metadata tools) strongly preferred
Experience with data governance tools including technical and business metadata, data lineage, etc.
Experience working in a regulatory, risk, and compliance environment and supporting associated projects
Experience in the financial services industry a plus
Experience with JIRA and Confluence,Title MDMMaster Data Analyst Location Austin, TX Duration Long term Knowledge, Skills and Abilities Experienced in Java Programming Language SQL Database Knowledge Should understand the data modeling concepts Detail oriented with excellent communication and interpersonal skills. Perform quality work within deadlines with or without direct supervision. Work effectively as a team contributor on all assignments. Work independently while understanding the necessity for communicating and coordinating work efforts with other employees. Ability to work effectively on large, cross-functional teams. Proficiency in use of Tibco EBX (or similar master data system), Microsoft Azure DevOps. Education and Experience Bachelorrsquos Degree in computer science, computer technology, business, or related field. Three (3) years of experience in Data Management, Report Development or Business Analysis. Thanks Regards Sai Kumar Sai Kumar Office 866.682.2966 Extn 220 Direct 512.687.4488 F 512.682.0400 saikumar.rvsiontek.com mailtosaikumar.rvsiontek.com www.vsiontek.com httpwww.vsiontek.com Vsion Technologies, Inc. 507 Denali Pass , Suite 602 , Cedar Park , TX 78613,Ishpi Information Technologies, Inc. (DBA ISHPI) is passionate about providing our customers with technical solutions that satisfy their business needs. Through collaborative interactions with customers, team members, subject matter experts (SMEs), technical leaders, and partners we design practical solutions that solve real problems for major government and business organizations. As a member of our group, you will work with a team of technologists focused on delivering innovative business solutions using emerging technologies through proven successful methods.

Responsible for the development, maintenance and support of an enterprise data warehouse system and corresponding data marts
Reviews data loaded into the data warehouse for accuracy
Troubleshoots and tunes existing data warehouse applications
Conducts research into new data warehouse applications and determines viability for adoption
Assists in establishing development standards
Evaluates existing subject areas stored in the data warehouse
Incorporates existing subject areas into an enterprise model
Creates new or enhanced components of the data warehouse

Associate degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, Engineering, or other Scientific/Technical discipline and 3 years of related work experience
Previous experience working in a data warehouse environment, which includes data design, database architecture, metadata, and repository creation
Must meet IAT-I requirements as specified in DoD 8570.01-M (A+, Network +, etc.)
Active Secret clearance
“Ishpi Information Technologies, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability, or status as a protected veteran.”,Job Title: System/Data Analyst
Location: Austin, TX
Duration: 12 Months with extension
Job Description:
The Systems Analyst (Data Standards Analyst) position at the Client will work on the Student Data System project which supports the mission of the agency of improving outcomes for Texas students.
Responsibilities include advanced and highly complex (senior level) computer systems analysis work.
The core responsibilities for this position includes analysis on current Ed-Fi data standards to determine how to best incorporate into the Client Education Data Standards.
Ed-Fi to mapping analysis and documentation will be other core responsibilities for this position.
Work involves coordinating the planning and analysis of user requirements, procedures, and problems related to the submission of data to the client Student Data System.
Additional responsibilities for this position include but are not limited to the publication of the Client Education Data Standards and data governance processes.
Works under minimal supervision with considerable latitude for the use of initiative and independent judgment.
This position serves the agency mission by providing guidance and support to school systems for state-mandated data collections.
Required Qualification:
Graduation from an accredited college with a bachelor's degree in Business or Public Administration, Computer Science, Communications or a related field.
Required Experience:
Experience with Ed-Fi methodology, Education Domain or Texas Education Data Standards
Required Skills:
Technical data analysis
Development of technical data mapping documents
System Analysis and Design
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
User interviews and analysis
Strong writing and communication skills
Business Process Development
Strong organization and facilitation skills
About our Company:
22nd Century Technologies is a business enterprise that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Its journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century technologies supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions. With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Technologies is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Position Purpose: Responsible for analytic data needs of the business unit. Handle complex data projects and acts as a lead for other Data Analysts.-Provide advanced analytical support for business operations in all or some of the following areas: claims, provider data, member data, clinical data, HEDIS, pharmacy, external reporting -Extract, load, model, and reconcile large amounts of data across multiple system platforms and sources -Review data to determine operational impacts and needed actions; elevate issues, trends, areas for improvement and opportunities to management. -Develop reports and deliverables for management -Model data using MS Excel, Access, SQL, and/or other data ware house analytical tools -Ensure compliance with federal and state deliverable reporting requirements by performing data quality audits and analysis. -Assist with training and mentoring other Data Analysts. Qualifications: Education/Experience: Bachelor’s degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of Enterprise Reporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation. HEDIS: Bachelor’s degree related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience or 2-4 years of HEDIS data analysis experience including measurement and rates impacted. Advanced knowledge of Business Intelligence Tools, SQL, and Microsoft Applications, including Excel and Access. BUSINESS ANALYTICS:: Bachelor’s degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of statistical analysis or 2+ years of related IT experience, including data warehouse, coding or ETL experience. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of Enterprise Reporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation. Encounters experience preferred. Data Governance: Bachelor’s degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of data analysis or 2+ years of related IT experience, including data warehouse. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of, Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation. HRIS Bachelor’s degree in related field or equivalent experience. 4+ years of related IT experience and/or data analysis experience, including 2+ years’ experience with HRMS such as PeopleSoft, SAP or Workday. Healthcare experience preferred. Advanced knowledge of Enterprise Reporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access. Strong understanding of HRMS database design, structure, functions and processes, and experience with databases tools. Supports HR systems as functional administrator evaluating new release functionality to include testing and implementation of new functionality. Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation.,We are currently looking for Splunk Administrator Splunk Analyst for our direct client in Austin TX Splunk Administrator Interview- Video Directory Servicersquos Splunk provides datalog query, analysis and visualization services to system administrators, application developers and Information Security. The Splunk administrator will manage a large scale infrastructure with multiple sites, clustered index servers and search header clusters. The Splunk administrator shall work with consumers to help them make maximum usage of collected data for troubleshooting, analysis and machine learning. The Splunk admin will work on Multiple-site Splunk Enterprise instance maintenance Data onboarding projects using various Splunk input methods and sources, including HEC, UF, Inputs, scripts against Servers, K8s, cell phones, private cloud, Azure and AWS Compose advanced search query, field extraction and dashboards for consumers Basic Qualifications Rich experience on data analysis skills using Splunk Experience creating dashboards and reports. Strong knowledge managing Splunk Enterprise infra Splunk architect certification desirable Thanks Ashu BayOne Solutions aadhikariatbayonesolutionsdotcom,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

2x76bcYuVz,Title: Senior Data Analyst / Senior BI and Insights Analyst

Employment Type: W2

LinkedIn is a must

Key Responsibilities:

· Develops and supports multiple reporting, analyses and data initiatives across Product & Application Security organization

· Identifies, analyzes, and interprets trends or patterns, spots anomalies in complex data sets from a wide variety of data sources

· Develops intuitive dashboards and reports using visualization tools such as PowerBI, Tableau that provide visibility into key performance indicators across all Product & Application Security programs

· Creates and updates operational executive dashboards, reports, and templates

· Designs, creates and publishes weekly, monthly & quarterly operational reports

· Produces high quality output in a clear format that highlights actionable data points

· Develops and manages ongoing process improvements to the reporting workflow focusing on automation, accuracy, and timeliness of information

· Develops best practices and benchmarks for data analysis and reporting for the team

· Proactively engages internal and external partners to identify reporting needs and opportunities on an ongoing basis

· Collaborates with Product & Application Security domain leads to identify key performance indicators (KPIs) and operational metrics

· Drives transition from delivering metrics in presentations to showing live and interactive metric reporting

Essential Requirements:

· Bachelor’s degree in Information Systems, Mathematics, Statistics, Computer Science, or related field, or equivalent professional experience

· 8+ years of related experience as a business intelligence analyst, data analyst, business analyst or similar role

· Experience creating visualizations and dashboards using PowerBI, Tableau and/or Qlik

· Strong expertise with Excel, SQL, and Python, other like scripting/reporting tools

· Demonstrated ability to work cross-organizationally to gather business requirements, track and measure against goals, objectives or KPIs

· Demonstrated ability to interpret data to understand business impact and derive business insights

Desired Requirements:

· Experience with Atlassian tools (Jira Core, Jira Software, Jira Service Desk) or other workflow management systems

· Experience working in a technology/software company

· Experience working with an Engineering Operations, Security or Risk Management organization is a plus

Key Characteristics:

· Excellent written and verbal communication skills

· Ability to dialogue with engineering at a reasonable level of technical depth

· Ability to prioritize projects, tasks and deliverables and manage dynamic priorities

Job Types: Full-time, Part-time,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

qmteEfLHy2,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

lBDnkQw1Lg,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

wuvnBU8ke6,Job Title: System Analyst (Data) - PL/SQl Server
Location: Jacksonville, FL
Duration: Full-time
Interview Mode: Telephonic

Job Description:
Job Title System Analyst (Data) - PL/SQl Server
Technical/Functional Skills · 5 or more years work experience in an application development and/or systems analysis role or equivalent combination of transferrable experience and education.
· Bachelor's degree in an IT related field or equivalent work experience
· Strong experience in data validation and manipulation in SQL Server databases using SQL queries
· Strong understanding of integration points of assigned business/systems and processes
· Extensive knowledge and experience of systems, subsystems, development methodologies, systems architecture, tools and processes that support the assigned business initiative or system.
· Experience in applying research methodology to business solutions.
· Knowledge of systems development concepts and methods · Experience with business requirements and business process analysis to ensure IT solutions meet the business needs
· Experience managing multiple priorities and ability to facilitate adoption of changing priorities
· Demonstrated negotiation skills and ability to build relationships.
· Excellent communication skills including ability to explain complex technical concepts in a clear and concise manner to audiences with diverse knowledge base
Experience Required 5+ years
Roles & Responsibilities · Gather business requirements, interacting with cross-functional departments to translate concepts to create a fully defined requirements process.
· Preparation of standardized documentation for internal and external stakeholders.
· Oversees end-to-end requirements, design, build and development of all applicable workflows and capabilities from conception to implementation.
· Analyzes and documents business requirements and ensures systems requirements and project plans are in alignment with business needs.
· Defines business process scope and objectives as well as detailed business requirements and works with IT partners to translate into systems requirements.
· Works through complexities associated with the coordination across multiple areas with conflicting efforts and limited resources.
· Identify persistent problems, working with wider teams and create documentation.
· Communicate business priorities and requirements to the technology organization for design and implementation, in order to drive effective business solutions.
· Works with test team to ensure the testing results correspond to the business expectations.
· Maintains effective communication with management and project teams.
· Accountable for understanding and communicating accurate business requirements to IT partners and ensuring technical specifications accurately reflects business needs.
Generic Managerial Skills · Creating Project Plan and Track status
· Handling Customer communications and Management reporting
· Experience in Health Care (preferable)
Education Bachelor's degree in an IT related field or equivalent work experience

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Data AnalystFort Worth, TXData Analyst Fort Worth, TX

Outstanding opportunity for a Data Analyst to work with the Intelligent Automation team RPA, NLP, AI and Advanced Analytics, to provide specialization in Advanced Analytics to extract insight from information by iterating rapidly to summarize and visualize large data sets. You will be working closely with business SMEs, operations research and will be learning / leveraging AI tools & techniques. You will assist in efforts to create analytical solutions for client initiatives. Youll be responsible for data exploration, discovery, and presentation of gathered insight from data. You will be responsible for visualizing and communicating insight extracted from data to stakeholders at various levels across the company. You will construct, test, maintain and architect supporting datasets.

This position requires Hands on & expert experience with enterprise data visualization tools like Tableau and / or Power BI leveraging Azure AI platform tools like Databricks & Auto ML, etc. Proven ability to work independently on big projects is essential. Ability to facilitate conversations with business SMEs to understand the problem, rapidly iterate proposed solutions and clearly present new findings/ solutions is required. Lead-level experience providing technical & functional guidance is a must. Experience with relational database management system development also a required. Must be able to build analytics solution including data exploration, extraction, cleaning, transformation, testing and implementation. Solid analysis and problem-solving skills and superior interpersonal skills with the ability to work with several stakeholders across multiple organizations is required. Must be open to learn new tools and technologies and able to adapt to fast-paced working environment. Preferred Experience includes: Project leadership experience leading collaborative efforts; Masters Degree in Management Information Systems, Computer Science or equivalent; and, ability to write code in python, java and R.

Desired Skills: Data Analytics, Enterprise Reporting, Tableau, Power BI, RDBMS, Azure AI, Databricks, Auto ML, Python, Java, R

**Local candidates preferred**,Job Description
Job Description:

Role: Data reporting & Analytics Administrator

Location: Fort Worth, TX

Job type: Fulltime

Responsibilities:
We are currently looking for Data Reporting Analytics Administrator for our expanding IT department.
Setup Einstein Analytics Studio, set up the data flows to automatically import selected objects to datasets from Salesforce and MS SQL Databases, build the recipes and Lens to analyze the data and publish the stories in the form of recommendations back into Salesforce
Develop visualization dashboards of data using Einstein Analytics and standard Salesforce dashboards
Prepare daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual reporting
Perform data and system analysis to support broader oversight processes within a functional area. In addition, this role provides reporting and insight to guide business decisions and initiatives, while maintaining a high level of data integrity
Provide insights based on findings and making recommendations based on strategic understanding of the data collected through analysis of business intelligence
Assess current reporting capabilities and help drive strategic innovation and evolution for improvement on performance reporting
Drive consistency in the application of data as a management system through standardized reporting and analysis
Support requirements for new reports and dashboards, creates actionable insight and understanding, through the analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data and provide recommendations that address business objectives
Interact with external vendors to extract, interpret, and communicate data
Interpret and measure the impact of business actions, including process and system enhancements
Leverage the development of new data sources to provide new perspectives of performance and identify new opportunities for continuous improvement
Work with large data volumes and combine data from disparate sources into concise structures
Verify data capture, identify and resolve data quality issues discovered during insights and reporting process
Build models to conduct high-quality business, market, and competitor analysis; and help identify and assess existing and new market initiatives
Required experience/Education:
3-7 years of experience (2 years minimum or relevant experience in the role)
BS in Computer Science or related field preferred
Salesforce Einstein Analytics & SAQL (Salesforce Analytics Query Language)
UI and/or Data Visualization experience; any exposure to other data visualization tools such as Microsoft PowerBI or Tableau would be a considerable
MS SQL server RDBMS knowledge and experience – Database design, SQL/T-SQL Queries, Views, and Stored Procedures
Salesforce Certified Administrator is a plus.
Salesforce Certified Analytics Discovery Consultant is a plus.,Must Have Skills (Top 3 technical skills only) ETL and MDM ( Master Data Management) Experience in Data Integration testing through Master Data management (MDM) Experience in test data management and data governance using MDM and automation Nice to have skills Strong in SQL Querying Detailed Job Description Experience in Data Integration testing through Master Data management MDM. Experience in test data management and data governance using MDM and automation. Healthcare experience. Strong in SQL Querying. Experience in Data Integration testing through Master Data management MDM. Experience in test data management and data governance using MDM and automation. Minimum years of experience 5+ Top 3 responsibilities you would expect the Subcon to shoulder and execute Estimation Status Report Test Plan, Test Cases, Test Data ownership on all the projects.,Category: ETL/Business Intelligence
Location: Fort Worth, Texas

Data Analyst (Rapid Insightful Analytics) Team: Intelligent Automation – RPA, NLP, AI and Advanced Analytics Job Summary: Provide specialization in advanced analytics to extract insight from information by iterating rapidly, to summarize, visualize large data sets. This position will be...


Details Apply,PRIMARY DUTIES & KEY RESPONSIBILITIES(Primary duty should be 50% or more of the employee’s daily duties) Primary Duties: (These duties form the basis for the classification determination) Leverage analytical tools to perform routine data collection, analysis and reporting of credit risk KPI’s (i.e., delinquencies, vintage losses rates, application conversion) to monitor and communicate trends of our loan portfolios. Key Responsibility 1: Mine, model, analyze large datasets, and utilizes predictive modeling techniques with an emphasis on optimizing credit risk and analyzing customer behavior using the following predictive modeling techniques: linear/logistic regression, factor analysis, decision trees, clustering, segmentation, etc. Key Responsibility 2: Build and validate a variety of statistical models, provides analytic support, and develops new criteria and/or strategies. Key Responsibility 3: Perform product or other segment level analytics to analyze performance of existing products and assist with roll-out of new product policy and pricing strategies for various product offerings. Key Responsibility 4: Implement credit models, rules, scorecards, and strategies into the company’s Decision Engine software that houses the Credit Policy. Work with internal IT resources to test and deploy new implementations. Key Responsibility 5: Collaborate with other departments across the organization to drive improvement in quality, volume, service, and profitability. Key Responsibility 6: Identify process improvement opportunities and involve in developing/executing projects JOB PROFILE (for recruitment purpose only) Education: Bachelors degree in a quantitative subject. (Mathematics, Statistics, Economics preferred) Required experience: 3-5 years experience preferred in the analytical or financial services field. Technical skills / abilities: Strong technical aptitude. Familiarity with ETL processes, SQL, SAS, R highly preferred. Personal skills Understanding of business needs/requirements, ability to effectively communicate with both internal departments and external vendors/clients, ability to self-motivate and manage multiple analytical projects simultaneously. PRIMARY DUTIES & KEY RESPONSIBILITIES (Primary duty should be 50% or more of the employee’s daily duties) Primary Duties: (These duties form the basis for the classification determination) Leverage analytical tools to perform routine data collection, analysis and reporting of credit risk KPI’s (i.e., delinquencies, vintage losses rates, application conversion) to monitor and communicate trends of our loan portfolios. Key Responsibility 1: Mine, model, analyze large datasets, and utilizes predictive modeling techniques with an emphasis on optimizing credit risk and analyzing customer behavior using the following predictive modeling techniques: linear/logistic regression, factor analysis, decision trees, clustering, segmentation, etc. Key Responsibility 2: Build and validate a variety of statistical models, provides analytic support, and develops new criteria and/or strategies. Key Responsibility 3: Perform product or other segment level analytics to analyze performance of existing products and assist with roll-out of new product policy and pricing strategies for various product offerings. Key Responsibility 4: Implement credit models, rules, scorecards, and strategies into the company’s Decision Engine software that houses the Credit Policy. Work with internal IT resources to test and deploy new implementations. Key Responsibility 5: Collaborate with other departments across the organization to drive improvement in quality, volume, service, and profitability. Key Responsibility 6: Identify process improvement opportunities and involve in developing/executing projects JOB PROFILE (for recruitment purpose only) Education: Bachelors degree in a quantitative subject. (Mathematics, Statistics, Economics preferred) Required experience: 3-5 years experience preferred in the analytical or financial services field. Technical skills / abilities: Strong technical aptitude. Familiarity with ETL processes, SQL, SAS, R highly preferred. Personal skills Understanding of business needs/requirements, ability to effectively communicate with both internal departments and external vendors/clients, ability to self-motivate and manage multiple analytical projects simultaneously.,PRIMARY DUTIES & KEY RESPONSIBILITIES(Primary duty should be 50% or more of the employee’s daily duties) Primary Duties: (These duties form the basis for the classification determination) Leverage analytical tools to perform routine data collection, analysis and reporting of credit risk KPI’s (i.e., delinquencies, vintage losses rates, application conversion) to monitor and communicate trends of BorrowWorks’ loan portfolios. Key Responsibility 1: Mine, model, analyze large datasets, and utilizes predictive modeling techniques with an emphasis on optimizing credit risk and analyzing customer behavior using the following predictive modeling techniques: linear/logistic regression, factor analysis, decision trees, clustering, segmentation, etc. Key Responsibility 2: Build and validate a variety of statistical models, provides analytic support, and develops new criteria and/or strategies. Key Responsibility 3: Perform product or other segment level analytics to analyze performance of existing products and assist with roll-out of new product policy and pricing strategies for various product offerings. Key Responsibility 4: Implement credit models, rules, scorecards, and strategies into the company’s Decision Engine software that houses the Credit Policy. Work with internal IT resources to test and deploy new implementations. Key Responsibility 5: Collaborate with other departments across the organization to drive improvement in quality, volume, service, and profitability. Key Responsibility 6: Identify process improvement opportunities and involve in developing/executing projects JOB PROFILE (for recruitment purpose only) Education: Bachelors degree in a quantitative subject. (Mathematics, Statistics, Economics preferred) Required experience: 3-5 years experience preferred in the analytical or financial services field. Technical skills / abilities: Strong technical aptitude. Familiarity with ETL processes, SQL, SAS, R highly preferred. Personal skills Understanding of business needs/requirements, ability to effectively communicate with both internal departments and external vendors/clients, ability to self-motivate and manage multiple analytical projects simultaneously. PRIMARY DUTIES & KEY RESPONSIBILITIES (Primary duty should be 50% or more of the employee’s daily duties) Primary Duties: (These duties form the basis for the classification determination) Leverage analytical tools to perform routine data collection, analysis and reporting of credit risk KPI’s (i.e., delinquencies, vintage losses rates, application conversion) to monitor and communicate trends of BorrowWorks’ loan portfolios. Key Responsibility 1: Mine, model, analyze large datasets, and utilizes predictive modeling techniques with an emphasis on optimizing credit risk and analyzing customer behavior using the following predictive modeling techniques: linear/logistic regression, factor analysis, decision trees, clustering, segmentation, etc. Key Responsibility 2: Build and validate a variety of statistical models, provides analytic support, and develops new criteria and/or strategies. Key Responsibility 3: Perform product or other segment level analytics to analyze performance of existing products and assist with roll-out of new product policy and pricing strategies for various product offerings. Key Responsibility 4: Implement credit models, rules, scorecards, and strategies into the company’s Decision Engine software that houses the Credit Policy. Work with internal IT resources to test and deploy new implementations. Key Responsibility 5: Collaborate with other departments across the organization to drive improvement in quality, volume, service, and profitability. Key Responsibility 6: Identify process improvement opportunities and involve in developing/executing projects JOB PROFILE (for recruitment purpose only) Education: Bachelors degree in a quantitative subject. (Mathematics, Statistics, Economics preferred) Required experience: 3-5 years experience preferred in the analytical or financial services field. Technical skills / abilities: Strong technical aptitude. Familiarity with ETL processes, SQL, SAS, R highly preferred. Personal skills Understanding of business needs/requirements, ability to effectively communicate with both internal departments and external vendors/clients, ability to self-motivate and manage multiple analytical projects simultaneously.,Job Description
BI Data Analyst/Specialist
Senior Business Analyst, Data and Analytics

Job Requirements
Bachelors or equivalent with 5+ years of experience
In depth knowledge in a variety of analytics techniques including: profiling, data mining, modeling, statistical analysis and campaign measurement
Experience working with data environments and strong knowledge in querying language and/or querying applications (SQL, Alteryx, BRIO)
Strong in MS Office Package usage skill especially MS Excel. Very strong spreadsheet and relational database skills
Role
The Senior Business Analyst will report to the Vice President of Business Intelligence and will be responsible for the filling the growing demand for business intelligence across WI.
The Skills You Bring
You have a passion for leveraging data to drive better business decision-making through statistical, econometric modeling, and technological techniques
You have a deep understanding of analytical techniques and how they can be applied to address particular problem characteristics
You have a strong analytical and problem-solving skills, particularly in the areas of strategy development, business analysis, risks and opportunity assessment
You have a working knowledge of analytic technologies (e.g. Alteryx, SAS, SQL, R, Python, BRIO, Tableau, Adobe Analytics, etc.)
You know how to acquire data from multiple sources/environments and transform it so it can be used for analytics

Company Description
About Global Technical Talent:
GTT is a 100% owned subsidiary of Chenega Corporation, a Native American Corporation performing on 250+ federal projects and 100+ commercial projects with over 5,800 US employees and 1 Billion in annual Revenue. GTT is a leading national staffing agency focused on IT talent; with clients nationwide and a technology-driven recruiting infrastructure.

WHY GTT:
Flexible work-life Balance, GTT’s exceptional employee driven culture. 1⁄2 day on Friday during summer, few days remote option.
Excellent base salary, One of industries TOP commission structure, three-week vacation.
State of the art Recruiting Infrastructure, AI driven ATS, 9 Million Unique Talent profile, 90+ highly experience Talent advocated.
Parent Company: 5600+ employee organization, over 900m in annual revenues across a variety of industries. Native American Company (8a ANC corporation)/ Minority Owned Benefits:
20 years of referenceable past performance with fortune 500 clients
Our long-term clients include some of national larges companies such as Goldman Sachs, TD Bank, UBS, Thomson Reuters, BOSE, TJX, Partners Healthcare, Fidelity, Amazon/Audible, LYFT, Eversource, PG&E, Abbot and more.,Job Description
Job duties/description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

AicCM0FVfA,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

EwmRECs19V,OUR GOAL:
Treat our consultants and clients the way we would like others to treat us — we are honest, stay true to our word, and work in the best interest of our clients, consultants, and candidates. Many say they work this way, but few actually do. We are a company that does. Additionally, we bring joy to the world of IT staffing and IT recruiting by making the hiring experience memorable, fun, and different.

OUR MISSION:
Find and provide the best talent for clients and excellent career opportunities for consultants and candidates — whom we treat as part of our team. Interested in joining our team? Check out the opportunity below and apply today!

Reference: 412275

Data Validation Analyst. We are looking to fill a contract role to support our client in Dublin, OH with a Data Validation Analyst. This person must be able to understand business requirements and technical specification, and work with the business to gain knowledge as to how the requirements have been documented. He or she must be able to understand business priorities and importance of assigned projects. For this role, the Data Validation Analyst must be familiar with Data Conversions, requirements, and scenarios for data validation.

Job duties in this position include the following:
• Perform quality review activities to ensure various data validation procedures were executed in accordance with Program Methodology.
• Assess data validation activities performed by the Program to ensure DVD’s were completed and that sufficient documentation was produced and retained, appropriately.
• Interact with Project Managers from multiple teams to perform follow-ups in order to conclude on DVD results.
• Maintain documentation of results and communicate results to respective teams within the Project

Qualifications:
Bachelor's Degree in a Computer Science, Business or related discipline preferred
2-4 years experience analyzing Business Processes in order to obtain evidence to ensure controls are functioning properly.
• Demonstrates proven IT knowledge of business analysis process and functions
• Strong collaboration, multi-tasking and organization skills.
• Strong oral and written communication skills, Speak English fluently and clearly
• Demonstrates proven ability to prioritize team tasks
• Demonstrates thorough knowledge of the industry and trends
• Works independently, often determining own work priorities.
• Acts as a resource for colleagues with less experience.
• Proficient skills in Microsoft standard desktop applications including Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Exchange, Visio, Project Has in-depth experience, knowledge and skills in own job family
Revel IT (formerly known as Fast Switch) is one of the fastest-growing, privately held, IT Staffing companies in the nation. Our client base includes 32% of the Fortune 25. We have major offices in Dublin, OH, Phoenix, AZ, Los Angeles, CA, and Austin, TX and are rapidly expanding into new markets from coast to coast.

WHY REVEL:
In addition to standard health and 401k benefits, we offer referral bonuses and training/continuing education opportunities.
5-year client retention: 99%
No. 1 supplier with customers: 53%
Top 3 supplier with customers: 77%
Consultant retention: 94%

We do our jobs in a way that brings delight every day to our clients and the people who work with us. Life is simply too short to grind through every day as a small cog in a huge recruiting machine. As a young and high energy company, we aim to help consultants and candidates land fulfilling jobs that offer real career growth.,Overview

Role: Data Analyst Lead – Informatica/Business Objects
Work Location: Columbus, OH (LOCAL CANDIDATES ONLY)

Duration: Long Term

NO OPT VISAS ALLOWED / USC & GCH are preferred

Description:
• Six years’ experience working with Informatica/EDW/Business Objects
• Good in Oracle PL/SQL
• Having experience working Application support on Analyst roles
• Good experience on Client facing role
• Nice to have experience in working on-shore off-shore role
• Should be capable of interacting with client independently

Naveen Kumar |

T 585.532.7200 Ext: 9022

Mobile no: 408.809.8869 | naveen.b@avanitechsolutions.com,

687 Lee Road, Suite # 208, Rochester, NY 14606

http://www.avanitechsolutions.com,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

xlPWFg0Uja,Amyx is seeking to hire an Information Security and Data Protection Analyst to support the Defense Logistics Agency in the Columbus, OH area.

Handling Remedy Work Orders. This means experience using and generating Remedy tickets. Track their own work and the work of others through Remedy.
Tasking Duties. Experience and comfort tasking out work to be members of the same team and/or to different teams. Being able to track their own work, as well as the work of others will be important.
Hitting deadlines and juggling multiple projects at a time. Being able to prioritize work so that frequently occurring assignments are meeting Service Level Agreement (SLA) deadlines.
Capturing and collecting web activity reports and log-in/log-out reports.
Decrypting, in-bulk, Outlook data in a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). This includes data
Forensically collecting Electronically Stored Information (ESI) for legal purposes by maintaining data integrity. Collecting data so that it can be reviewed by legal teams for potential or impending litigation will be a main task. This will require extensive use of Robocopy for metadata preservation.
Knowing and using Data Loss Prevention (DLP) industry best practices. This includes using both tools and techniques well-known in the industry.
Identifying and protecting Personally Identifiable Information (PII) on the network that requires securing.
The ability to become a Key Recovery Agent (KRA) in a PKI.
Supported Technologies:
Zeva Inc.’s Decryptnabox
Robocopy, ArcSiteLogger
ForcePoint, Remedy

Required Skills and Qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree in Information Technology, Computer Science or another directly relatable field.
5+ years of work experience in a related field.
Technical versatility and organization is a must
Security+ Certificate
Desired Skills and Qualifications:
CISSP or similar certification preferred (CISM, GSEC, etc.)
Department of Defense and PKI experience preferred
Office 365 experience would be a plus
Amyx is an Equal Opportunity employer. Amyx is committed to providing equal employment opportunity to all job seekers. Every qualified applicant receives focused consideration for employment and no one is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability or protected veteran status. In addition to federal law requirements, Amyx complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Veterans/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Amyx is an E-Verify employer.

Amyx proudly and proactively takes affirmative action to advance employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans and individuals with disabilities.


Physical Demands

Employee needs to be able to sit at a workstation for extended periods; use hand(s) to handle or feel objects, tools, or controls; reach with hands and arms; talk and hear. Most positions require ability to work on desktop or laptop computer for extended periods of time reading, reviewing/analyzing information, and providing recommendations, summaries and/or reports in written format. Must be able to effectively communicate with others verbally and in writing. Employee may be required to occasionally lift and/or move moderate amounts of weight, typically less than 20 pounds. Regular and predictable attendance is essential.,Job Description
Dedicated Tech Services, Inc. (DTS) is an award-winning IT consulting firm based in Columbus, OH. We now have an opening for a Technical Data Analyst in Columbus, Ohio.

US Citizens and those authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply. We are unable to sponsor at this time.

Direct applicants only, no corp-to-corp candidates, third parties, or agencies, please.

This is a right-to-hire position with our client.

This is a mid-level position. It is not suitable for recent college or graduate school graduates who do not have 3-5 years of professional data analysis experience.

Required Skills and Experience:
3-5 years of professional experience in technical data analysis
Experience in analyzing business needs to determine technical requirements and communicate with engineers and business stakeholders.
Experience in eliciting, analyzing, validating, documenting, and managing technical systems and application requirements and in developing artifacts such as user stories and story cards
Experience developing current and future state process flows
Must have strong SQL query skills for relational databases (Postgres, Redshift) and for manipulating data and inserting application configurations
Strong Agile knowledge experience
Experience in data modeling, mapping, reporting, and profiling
JIRA skills and experience
Need UI backend data warehouse experience
Understand data warehouse concepts, schemas, relational and dimensional data models.
Organization skills to understand project status, answer support questions, and handle multiple, sometimes conflicting, priorities and requests.
Desired Skills and Experience:
Alation data catalog
Healthcare/clinical data experience; Varian/Onco EMR; EDI 837/835
HIPAA/PHI/HiTrust privacy/security understanding
Confluence
Jupyter notebooks
Scrum, Kanban, and agile processes and methods
Acceptance test driven development (ATDD) requirements methods
Clinical data knowledge, test scenarios, GitHub, as-is, to be and data flow diagramming
Technical professional that can describe their process for breaking down epics, acceptance criteria for cards, 3 amigos and helping the team size and break down work.
Job Description:

We are looking for a Technical Data Analyst who will build and operate the clinical data lake. Our client’s team imports and exports clinical patient data for use in other applications, as well as commercial reporting and analytics products. The data lake consists of multiple products, including managed file transfer (MFT); data parser, router, and compliance filter; and patient matching and de-identifications services. You will perform operations support, data analysis (including data profiling and mapping) for defects and anomalies, and you will write requirements for Agile stories. Specifically, you will:
Elicit, analyze, validate, document, and manage IT systems requirements
Execute daily operations queries to ensure all files were received from vendors as expected, all data was ingested, exports occurred, and data quality counts are matching expectations.
Serve as the initial triage point for all issue resolution with vendors and customers if data was not imported or exported as expected.
Contact vendors to arrange for data to be re-sent and communicate with downstream customers as to the status of issues resolution.
Escalate to management, stakeholders, engineering, and infrastructure staff as necessary.
Ensure data quality by analyzing counts of data sent, processed, and received. Identify and investigate data anomalies in the data warehouse and create defect cards for corrections of code and/or data.
Based on roadmap items, business needs, and upcoming projects, decompose epics into user stories that include technical requirements for development; sources of information will be product owner and tech lead.
Lead team joint application development discussions, and issue sizing and prioritization to answer questions about requirements to ensure defect-free completed work.
For small projects, work directly with stakeholders and other technical teams to plan sequencing and timeline for development and testing activities.
For completed work, perform issue acceptance activities, ensuring requirements were met, check non-prod data to ensure correct processing.
Document standard operating procedures and team processes; organize the team document repository.
Create process models and diagrams to communicate internal application processes for business stakeholders.
Using data catalog tool, document, annotate, and describe data assets for others to understand available data and metadata for feasibility analysis.
Additional tasks may include:
Facilitate Agile ceremonies (standups/retros/demos)
Leadership of small projects
Assist with product roadmaps/planning
Assist product ownership activities
Pair development with engineers
Communicating with customers/vendors,Charlotte, North Carolina
Skills : Reporting, databases, analysis, validation, Analytical, analyzes,SQL queries,stored procedures,database,queries
Description : Job Title: Data Analyst (mid level)
Location: Charlotte, NC
Duration: 12-18 months contract
Description:
Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting.
Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures.
Extracts and analyzes data from various sources, including databases, manual files, and external websites.
Responds to data inquiries from various groups within an organization.
Creates and publishes regularly scheduled and ad hoc reports.
Documents reporting requirements and processes and validates data components as requirements.Reporting, databases, analysis, validation, Analytical, analyzes,SQL queries,stored procedures,database,queries,Job Summary Our large financial client in Charlotte, NC is looking for a HadoopData Analyst. This job consists of finding data issues, communicating with business partners, analyzing data issues, what causes it, fixing and testing. Responsibilities Candidate will work directly with line of business stakeholders to define scenario requirements work in a cross-functional environment, as part of an agile team and will require an understanding of both business and technical processes. Gather requirements and create clear documentation of Functional, and Non-Functional Business Requirements Requirements Experience with Hadoop, Spark, Scala, HQL Experience in data analysis Immediate level with SQL querying About Matlen Silver Matlen Silver is the hardest working staffing team in the U.S. We do what we know is right for consultants and companies, creating a unique and powerful recruiting and talent experience. When the rubber meets the road, Matlen Silver is the powerhouse that cuts through the nonsense and gets you the job you want and deserve. If you are a rock star go-getter with a proven track record of success, put us to the test!,Job Description

• Strong ability to examine physical data and infer relationships to business context and requirements

• Strong understanding of LEAN AGILE or other iterative development methodologies with practical exposure to these techniques

• Ability to write SQL against various DB management systems: Oracle, Teradata, HIVE, Impala, SQL Server

• 7+ years of experience in financial services

• Direct participation/support of technical delivery

• Data preparation

• Data management

• Global Markets subject matter expertise

• Data Dictionary Management

• Blueprint

Job Function

TECHNOLOGY

Role

Analyst

Job Id

158279

Desired Skills

Data Analytics,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

c2AGilqtJ2,Job Title: Data Analyst
Location: Charlotte, NC
Duration: Full-time
Interview Mode: Telephonic

Job Description:
• Strong ability to examine physical data and infer relationships to business context and requirements
• Strong understanding of LEAN AGILE or other iterative development methodologies with practical exposure to these techniques
• Ability to write SQL against various DB management systems: Oracle, Teradata, HIVE, Impala, SQL Server
• 7+ years of experience in financial services
• Direct participation/support of technical delivery
• Data preparation
• Data management
• Global Markets subject matter expertise
• Data Dictionary Management
• Blueprint.

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Req ID: 94674

NTT DATA Services strives to hire exceptional, innovative and passionate individuals who want to grow with us. If you want to be part of an inclusive, adaptable, and forward-thinking organization, apply now.

We are currently seeking a Senior Data Analyst to join our team in Charlotte, North Carolina (US-NC), United States (US).

Role Responsibilities:

* Generate data management deliverables such as business need analysis, data source identification and analysis, and data modeling techniques.

* Participate in the analysis and resolution of issues related to information flow and content with data stakeholders.

* Gather data and develop reports for major statistical data calls received from various sources.

* Implement and maintain the reporting of data to various departments.

* Apply business knowledge to analyze data, develop reports, and solve problems.

* Research and resolve any data or reporting issues that arise.

* Communicate all data issues or problems to management and makes recommendations for solutions.

* Establish and implement audit tools and procedures to monitor the team's performance.

* Perform ad hoc analyses of data depending on business needs.

* Assist ETL Architects in developing source to target mapping.

Basic Qualifications:

* Bachelor's Degree in a technical or business discipline or equivalent technical expertise.

* 2+ years of experience analyzing data

* 1+ year of general knowledge in IT concepts, strategies and methodologies, IT architectures, data standards, and general knowledge of a business function(s) and of business operations.

* 2+ years of proficiency in SQL, DBMS Languages, Data Profiling, Data Design, and Data Architecture

* Ability to travel at least 50% according to client demands

Preferences:

* Consulting experience highly preferred

* Industry-specific consulting experience (FSI, Manufacturing, Healthcare)

* Merger & acquisition experience

* High travel tolerance

About NTT DATA Services

NTT DATA Services is a global business and IT services provider specializing in digital, cloud and automation across a comprehensive portfolio of consulting, applications, infrastructure and business process services. We are part of the NTT family of companies, a partner to 85 % of the Fortune 100.

NTT DATA Services is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all qualified applicants for employment without regard to race, gender, disability, age, veteran-status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other class protected by law.

#INDCNSINS,Role: Market Data Analysis Expert only W2
Location: 100 % remote
Years of Experience: Typically, 10+, 5+ could be acceptable depending on skills and knowledge.
Business Context:
Must Haves:
Corporate Bond [HY or IG] Electronic Trading market structure
Deep understanding on Financial calculations, such as conversion of Yield to Price and basic understanding of Spread
Deep understanding of BWIC/OWIC negotiating protocol, including nuisances with LP/ECN/ATS
Deep understanding of Offer Management including concepts of Tiering levels
Deep understanding of Market Data including Aggregated, Consolidated and Montage books
Understanding of Post Trade Feed flows including calculations for settlement
Nice to Have
Understanding of Risk including DV01, CR01 and generally what these numbers indicate
Understanding of strategies used to position particular inventory sectors
Understanding of micro-market structures and typical areas exploited by Algorithmic partners
Understanding of any Regulatory organizations
Technology Skills:
Must Haves:
Deep Java expertise including low latency techniques such as memory maps, ring buffers, thread pining and cache line consistency
Deep Experience with Distributed Memory Fabric
Deep experience with Messaging [JMS or native]
Experience with raw TCP/IP and UDP/Multicast [prefer to see how implemented reliable Multi-cast]
Understanding of Spring, Gradle and Docker
Experience with Relational Databases [Postgress or Oracle preferred]
Highly skilled in Linux scripting, troubleshooting and host tuning
Experience with Chromium Engines, HTML5 and Angular or React Javascript libraries
Nice to Have
Experience with C/C++, Rust or Python
Familiarity with Java Unsafe memory access model
Experience with Kubernetes configuration and Jenkins scripting
Big Data experience â prefer Hadoop with PIG or Hive
No SQL Experience, even Mongo DB is ok here
Tick Database and Market data streaming understanding
Complex Event Processor experience
Â
Â
Regards,
4975 Preston Park Blvd, Suite 500 Plano, TX 75093
Mob: 214-446- 4487
Phone: 972 430 1000 *127
Email: bala
www.tekleaders.com
Â
Â,Category: Other Area(s)
Location: Charlotte, North Carolina

Hi,

My Name is Sachin and I'm a Technical Recruiter working at Data Inc. We have an immediate need for a long term consulting assignment with our Direct Banking Client in Charlotte, North Carolina. If you are looking for a new opportunity, kindly revert at smishra@dataincusa.com OR 585.62...

Details,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

oO1gL6taGW,Role Responsibilities:

Candidate must have 3 years of Experience with Banking or Financial Services Industry.

Work in fast paced environment with shifting priorities to analyze data and work with client sponsors to interpret data and influence changes

Face off with project sponsor and key stakeholders providing weekly status reports and regular client communication across business and technology resources

Lead stakeholder workshops, interviews, and discovery sessions to validate key requirements and discovery session to validate key requirements and deliverable reviews

Face off with project sponsor and key stakeholders providing weekly status reports and regular client communication

Create / build / run specialized reports regarding relationships on client accounts, etc.

Profiling data sources for Key Data Elements

Interpret the resulting statistics from the client profiles

Provide informative summaries about that data, inclusive of identifying data quality issues

Utilize SQL query /scripting skills, used to working in TOAD or similar tools for SQL query writing and execution

Navigate Excel and reformat into a presentable / executive level power point deck and not just cut and paste an excel spreadsheet or pivot table.

Basic Qualifications:

Bachelor's Degree in a technical or business discipline or equivalent technical expertise.

5+ years of experience analyzing data and data governance/data management principles

3+ years of Financial Services industry experience

3+ years of experience in SQL, DBMS Languages, Data Profiling, Data Design, Data Architecture or Big Data repositories

General knowledge in IT concepts, MDM-Client Data Domain, strategies and methodologies, IT architectures, data standards and general knowledge of a business function(s) and of business operations

Ability to travel according to client demands

Preferences:

Management consulting experience highly preferred

Regulatory and compliance experience

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $80,000.00 - $100,000.00 per year

Application Question:
How many years of Data Analytics, Data Governance and or Data Management?
Work Location:
One location
Benefits:
Health insurance
Dental insurance
Retirement plan
Paid time off
Work from home
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Company's website:
NTT Data Services
Work Remotely:
Yes,Job Description:
Good knowledge in Banking and Corporate Finance domain.
Worked in Migration projects and cross-functional teams Define project requirements (Functional and Non-Functional) interacting with a different team and gather.
Developing and implementing data analyses, data collection systems and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques, and provide ongoing reports.
Define project requirements (Functional and Non-Functional) and prepare the BRD and FRD.
Determine operational objectives by studying business functions, gathering information, and evaluating output requirements and formats Construct workflow charts and diagrams, studying system capabilities and writing specifications for the migration and extraction of data.
Good knowledge in SQL and Extracting data from database and analyze the data.
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks).
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc).
Knowledge in Waterfall/Agile Methodology Knowledge in SAP would be an advantage.,Fort Mill, South Carolina
Skills : Glossary, Data Dictionaries, Data Feed, Data Models, Data Lineage, metadata, data modeling, Data Definition Language, DDL, Data Manipulation Language, DML, data integrity,data analysis ,Informatica IDQ,IDQ,data quality,Data Requirements,SQL,data mapping,Data,Global ID,axon,metadata,MDM,AXON,Enterprise Data Catalog,Metadata Analyst ,Data Management
Description : We are currently looking to hire a Senior Metadata Analyst within the Enterprise Data and Information Services team, This position is responsible for supporting an enterprise-wide metadata program which seeks to achieve the required level of consistency, quality, understanding, and protection of data.

Job Title: Metadata Analyst
Location: Fort Mill, SC
Duration: 6 months contract to fulltime

Responsibilities
Perform data analysis and profiling using standard toolsets (such as Informatica IDQ or Global ID) as well as manual analysis methods to interpret trends or patterns, identify relationships, understand anomalies, assess data quality, and add context to requirements.
Perform data mapping and gap analysis.
Document Data Requirements Specifications based on interpretation of Business Requirements, discussions with stakeholders, and overall knowledge of the data.
Create and maintain Data Feed Specifications which capture the layout and metadata of all incoming and outgoing data feeds.
Skillsets
7-10 years’ experience as a Data Analyst, Systems Analyst, Data Modeler, or Metadata Analyst in a Data Management organization.
Experience maintaining metadata for complex data environments and ensuring data integrity.
Experience with establishing and metadata standards and best practices
Experience with Informatica IDQ, AXON, and Enterprise Data Catalog strongly preferred, or other comparable metadata toolsets.
Strong knowledge of SQL or other query languages.
Familiar with data modeling practices and standards across conceptual, logical, and physical levels.
Familiar with database design and development methodologies.
Familiar with Data Definition Language (DDL) and Data Manipulation Language (DML) SQL commands.
Experience maintaining metadata for complex data environments and ensuring data integrity.
Glossary, Data Dictionaries, Data Feed, Data Models, Data Lineage, metadata, data modeling, Data Definition Language, DDL, Data Manipulation Language, DML, data integrity,data analysis ,Informatica IDQ,IDQ,data quality,Data Requirements,SQL,data mapping,Data,Global ID,axon,metadata,MDM,AXON,Enterprise Data Catalog,Metadata Analyst ,Data Management,Category: Other Area(s)
Location: Charlotte, North Carolina

Hi

My Name is Aparna and I'm a Technical Recruiter working at Data Inc. We have an immediate need of a Senior Data Analyst for a long term consulting assignment with our Direct Banking Client in Charlotte, North Carolina. If you are looking for a new opportunity, kindl...

Details,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

GJzXavOkd3,About Tachyon Technologies.

Tachyon Technologies is a Digital Transformation consulting firm that partners with businesses to implement customer-focused business transformation. Tachyon Technologies collaborates with its clients to transform their business by leveraging existing IT investments and leading-edge digital solutions to positively impact their customers' experience. From initiation through realization, Tachyon Technologies understands what it takes for a consulting partnerÂto be effective and strives to deliver a meaningful solution that exceeds its clients' expectations.

Â

Position: Business + Data Analyst

Location: Charlotte NC

Duration: 6-12 months
Approximately 5 years in Business analysis/Data Analyst role.
Strong experience coordinating and communicating across cross-functional groups to stakeholders.
Elicit, analyze, communicate and validate requirements for business processes from users.
Capture and document current business workflow and recommend improvements and efficiencies.
Serve as a subject matter expect for development regarding evaluation workflow and understanding of FX/Capital Market.
Ability to understand business and regulatory systems.
Experience in Foreign Exchange and Interest Rate Derivative Systems.
Knowledge of Dodd-Frank Regulations relating to capital markets trading.
Experience with project management methodologies (Waterfall, Agile etc.)
Knowledge of Atlassian Suite (JIRA, Confluence).
Formulate testing strategies and assist users and developers in testing of key deliverables.
Â

Disclaimer:ÂThe above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.,7years of application/systems support/development experience
5+ years of SQL Server/Oracle experience - Should be able to write comple Sql scripts involving Joins, Views, functions, etc.
2 to 3 + years of UNIX/Linux experience
2+ years of Autosys experience
1+ years of PAC2000/JIRA/Service Now/ALM/Confluence experience
Knowledge and understanding of desktop and UNIX, Windows server operating systems
Should have excellent communication and people skills
Good problem solving skills,Category: Other Area(s)
Location: Charlotte, North Carolina

My name is Tapender Dutt from Data Inc. and I truly respect the time you're taking to read this Job Description. This opening is with one of our direct clients. Kindly revert at tgautam@dataincusa.com or contact me at 201-799-4948.

Charlotte nc

contract ...

Details,Organization: Accenture Federal Services Location: Charlotte, NC Accenture Federal Services, a wholly owned subsidiary of Accenture LLP, is a U.S. company with offices in Arlington, Virginia. Accenture's federal business has served every cabinet-level department and 30 of the largest federal organizations. Accenture Federal Services transforms bold ideas into breakthrough outcomes for clients at defense, intelligence, public safety, civilian and military health organizations. We believe that great outcomes are everything. Its what drives us to turn bold ideas into breakthrough solutions. By combining digital technologies with what works across the worlds leading businesses, we use agile approaches to help clients solve their toughest problems fastthe first time. So, you can deliver what matters most. Count on us to help you embrace new ways of working, building for change and put customers at the core. A wholly owned subsidiary of Accenture, we bring over 30 years of experience serving the federal government, including every cabinet-level department. Our 7,200 dedicated colleagues and change makers work with our clients at the heart of the nations priorities in defense, intel, public safety, health and civilian to help you make a difference for the people you employ, serve and protect. The Data Analyst will have a thorough understanding of the logical and physical data models behind both the operational and analytic data store. Read Less Qualifications Basic Qualifications: •Bachelors Degree •5 Years experience with ability to create reports using a variety of ETL tools and/or PLSQL or other BI tools.
•Able to clean data where necessary for accurate reporting and/or trending.
•5+ years expertise in one the following sectors: -Housing and mortgage finance -Mortgage lending -Mortgage servicing -Federal credit programs, banking, or - government benefit programs •Must be a US Citizen Preferred Qualifications: •Power BI experience strongly preferred An active security clearance or the ability to obtain one may be required for this role. Candidates who are currently employed by a client of Accenture or an affiliated Accenture business may not be eligible for consideration. Applicants for employment in the US must have work authorization that does not now or in the future require sponsorship of a visa for employment authorization in the United States and with Accenture (i.e., H1-B visa, F-1 visa (OPT), TN visa or any other non-immigrant status). Accenture is a Federal Contractor and an EEO and Affirmative Action Employer of Females/Minorities/Veterans/Individuals with Disabilities. Equal Employment Opportunity. All employment decisions shall be made without regard to age, race, creed, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability status, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, citizenship status or any other basis as protected by federal, state, or local law. Job candidates will not be obligated to disclose sealed or expunged records of conviction or arrest as part of the hiring process. Accenture is committed to providing veteran employment opportunities to our service men and women.,Responsible for identifying and designing automation opportunities.
Create effective and automated process to drive efficiency and consistency across all areas of big data and MongoDB
Work closely with peers and leadership to develop automation framework
Build various test cases using automation tools and efficiency in documenting them
Understanding of BIGDATA , MongoDB platforms and technologies
Deep understanding of QA principles , tools and reporting
Should be able to validate the data in the front end UI by comparing the data at backend tables
Execute test cases as planned for the assigned modules using knowledge of test execution process for both functional and non- functional process
Should work closely with multiple developers/teams and be able to handle multiple projects.
Use RDBMS/HIVE to execute test scripts , modify the scripts as required , identify , classify and raise defects using various defect tracking tools like Jira , Client ALM etc.
Create test cases for complex modules based on the defined test strategy for assigned module
Learn and adapt other new technologies that will be used in the same ecosystem
Required Qualifications:
5+ years of experience in building complex SQL queries and working on multiple platforms like BIGDATA and MongoDB
Proficient with automation tools and framework design.
Strong personal and organizational skills to execute project deliverables
Background in ETL and data warehousing
Mandatory BigData experience and preferably with MongoDB experience
Should be able to handle multiple projects.
Should have an exposure to banking domain
Should be able to validate the data across multiple platforms
Should have experience in creating a test strategy , test plan documents
Has worked with Agile methodologies such as Scrum, and has ability to write user stories using Agile tools or post-its and participate in agile ceremonies
Have a Bachelors in computer science , engineering or related technical discipline or equivalent combination of training and experience
Understanding of data flows , data architecture , ETL and processing of structured and unstructured data
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Some of the Tools used as part of the current project: Hive, Unix, MongoDB, Jira , Confluence, Any testing framework(Automation tool),OverviewAt Perficient you'll deliver mission-critical technology and business solutions to Fortune 500 companies and some of the most recognized brands on the planet. And you'll do it with cutting-edge technologies, thanks to our close partnerships with the world's biggest vendors. Our network of offices across North America, as well as locations in India and China, will give you the opportunity to spread your wings, too.We're proud to be publicly recognized as a "Top Workplace" year after year. This is due, in no small part, to our entrepreneurial attitude and collaborative spirit that sets us apart and keeps our colleagues impassioned, driven, and fulfilled.Perficient is on a mission to help the Healthcare industry take advantage of modern data and analytics architectures, tools, and patterns to improve the quality and affordability of care. This is an excellent opportunity for the right individual to assist Perficient and its customers to grow the capabilities necessary to improve care through better use of data and information, and in the process take their career to the next level.We are looking for a Healthcare Data Analyst with Healthcare Payer data experience to join our Healthcare Data & Analytics Practice.Prefer the candidate to be based in the San Francisco Bay area but would consider someone remote in the Pacific or Mountain timezones as some travel will be required.Job Overview:The Healthcare Data Analyst will wpork as part of a technical project team to gather requirements, perform technical and data analysis, define data requirements, and create data models and logical mappings to enable new data pipelines to move, transform, cleanse and populate data into downstream data models and interfaces. You will collaborate with some of the best talent in the industry to create and implement innovative high quality solutions, all done while working with Perficient and client team members.Responsibilities* Collaborate with Healthcare Provider business and data SMEs to profile source system data and perform logical mapping of source data into target data warehouse models, based on the existing business process and data/reporting requirements.* Establish, communicate and enforce best practices and standards* Mentor and provide oversight to less senior members of the teamQualifications* MUST HAVE A HEALTHCARE DATA ANALYST skill set* 8+ years of data analyst experience* Prior experience working as a data analyst in a data warehouse, data lake, or operational data store environment; 3+ years experience.* 2+ years of recent experience working with Healthcare Paye data, specifically with healthcare claims, membership, enrollment and clinical data is preferred* Experience performing data discovery, analysis and profiling* Experience creating logical source-to-target mappings which can be used by data integration engineers to develop batch and services based data pipelines to populate an enterprise data warehouse, data lake, or otherwise* Very strong sql query language skills.* Business and technical requirements elicitation, analysis and elaboration a plus.* Excellent verbal and written communication skills.* Strong consulting and customer relationship skillsPreferred Skills and Education:* Experience working with sql interpreters: Toad, Embarcadero, or equivalent; must have very strong sql skills* Experience with data analysis & profiling tools and patterns: IBM Information Analyzer, Informatica Data Analyzer, or equivalent* Database Management System exposure, ie DB2, Oracle, Netezza, Hadoop, or similar.* Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science or related field.Perficient full-time employees receive complete and competitive benefits. We offer a collaborative work environment, competitive compensation, generous work/life opportunities and an outstanding benefits package that includes paid time off plus holidays. In addition, all colleagues are eligible for a number of rewards and recognition programs including billable bonus opportunities. Encouraging a healthy work/life balance and providing our colleagues great benefits are just part of what makes Perficient a great place to work.More About PerficientPerficient is the leading digital transformation consulting firm serving Global 2000 and enterprise customers throughout North America. With unparalleled information technology, management consulting and creative capabilities, Perficient and its Perficient Digital agency deliver vision, execution and value with outstanding digital experience, business optimization and industry solutions.Our work enables clients to improve productivity and competitiveness; grow and strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers and partners; and reduce costs. Perficient's professionals serve clients from a network of offices across North America and offshore locations in India and China. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index.Perficient is an award-winning Premier Level IBM Business Partner, a Microsoft National Service Provider and Gold Certified Partner, an Oracle Platinum Partner, an Adobe Business Solution Partner, and a Salesforce Platinum Consulting Partner.Perficient is an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national, origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.Disclaimer: The above statements are not intended to be a complete statement of job content, rather to act as a guide to the essential functions performed by the employee assigned to this classification. Management retains the discretion to add or change the duties of the position at any time.#LI-DC1,This role can be based out of Mountain View, CA or San Francisco, CA

Who is Mindstrong?

Mindstrong is a research-driven, consumer-focused mental healthcare company working to unlock a new virtual care model for delivering healthcare to people living with a serious mental illness (SMI) through innovations in measurement science, and care delivery. Our services are offered to people with an SMI through active partnerships with several nationwide health insurance payers.

As a Series C company, we have a blend of science, technology, and healthcare talent to help us unlock this paradigm-shifting approach, including the likes of National Institute for Mental Health, Stanford Center for Neurobiological Imaging, Uber, Facebook, Google, Apple, Oscar Health, and CMS.

We'd love to talk more!

What is the Data Analyst role?

We are looking for a mission-driven and passionate Data Analyst to be a champion for data across all teams within Mindstrong. You'll move the business forward by working across all parts of the business--including Operations, Product, Tech, and Finance--to make data available and transparent so teams can make data-driven decisions.

In addition to your technical skills of mining, cleaning, and interpreting data, you'll use creative problem solving to find the most effective solutions to analytical problems. You'll build relationships with stakeholders across the company and help infuse each team with the data they need to meet and exceed their objectives.

What you'll do:
Inspire and influence a data-driven culture by partnering and collaborating with stakeholders across teams
Provide analytical support and leverage analytical frameworks to find standard and innovative solutions to problems
Interpret data within the context of business goals and objectives, identify trends, and explore data through a variety of segments and cohorts
Standardize, track, and report key metrics to stakeholders and leaders
Build and maintain clear, concise, and accurate dashboards, standardize data communication processes, and create external reports to support contractual commitments
Surface actionable insights and business recommendations, and craft data stories to cater your messages for different audiences
Improve and automate data tasks, and continuously refresh existing data extraction, aggregation, and analytical processes
Who you are:
Technical problem solver: You understand the technical nuts and bolts enough to pull, clean, and analyze data with a bias toward action
Curious and creative problem solver: You're excited to not only understand they "what", but also deeply understand the "why" so we find out how to improve business outcomes
Collaborative team player: You don't always have the answers, but you know how to work with others and leverage analytical frameworks to find them together
Your background and skills:
Advanced analytical skills using complex data sets
Experience with relational databases and SQL, combining data from multiple data sources
Strong business acumen and a bias toward action
Experience designing and improving business and data processes
Excellent verbal and written communications skills
Experience working cross-functionally
Experience leading data projects from inception through execution
Experience prioritizing and executing on multiple tasks simultaneously
Experience working in a fast-paced and dynamic environment with a constantly changing workload comprising short-term, long-term, and ad hoc projects
Bachelor's degree in Mathematics, Actuarial Science, Computer Science, Statistics, or a related field OR equivalent experience
4+ years of experience in data/business analysis, data science, engineering, or related reporting/analytics
Healthcare or government health program (e.g., Medicare/Medicaid) experience
Preferred qualifications including advanced programming languages (e.g., Python / R), data visualization tools (e.g., Mode, Tableau), and experience with big data or a high-growth company
Competitive Benefits:
Medical, Dental, and Vision coverage
401k
10 paid holidays
Unlimited PTO
Fully stocked kitchen and catered lunches
Casual dress code
Telecommuting benefits
Join us in our journey to transform the future of brain health!

Mindstrong is proud to be an Equal Employment Opportunity employer that celebrates diversity. We are committed to providing equal employment opportunities to all employees and applicants. All individuals seeking employment at Mindstrong are considered without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, ancestry, physical or mental disability, veteran status, gender identity, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by federal, state, or local laws. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment. Mindstrong also strives for a safe and robust workplace and prohibits harassment of any kind. If you have a disability or special need that requires accommodation for interviewing, please let us know by emailing contact-recruiting@mindstronghealth.com,Please find below, short Job Description for your reference:

Job description:

· 30% Meeting business stakeholders to gather/discuss business requirements

· 20% Business systems and data analysis

· 20% Documenting/Building technical specification

· 30% Working with engineering team development satisfies business functional requirements
Business systems analysis, data analysis (Teradata, Oracle, Hadoop), problem-solving
Data modeling & data solutions architecture
Communication skills
Bachelor's degree in computer science or engineering discipline with a strong quantitative aptitude
Ability to work with business leads, business stakeholders, subject matter experts and technical staff to gather and develop business needs in the form of technical requirements
Identifying and refining current and futurestate business processes by performing deep dive analysis of current state and propose future state solutions effectively using clear and precise documentation
Motivation to understand business processes and data platforms in order to design/deliver scalable data solutions to support customer needs
Good understanding of database principles and advanced SQL in order to perform complex analysis
Expert understanding of data modelling concepts, experience with data modelling and generating metadata to support relational & non-relational database implementations; experience building logical and physical data models.
Good understanding of distributed systems (Teradata, Hadoop), data movement and optimizing ETL processing of extremely large datasets with specified SLAs.
Collaborate closely with engineering team and provide ongoing support to help implement end user requirements
Ensure the consistency and quality of data solutions completed by engineering team.
Prior knowledge of any analytical visualization tools like Tableau, MSTR is desirable
Document data solutions for easy business consumption.
Strong communication skills, both written and verbal, and skilled at adjusting communication style/vocabulary to an audience's role/function and technical familiarity
Documentation of requirements/needs gathered from business teams
Communications/updates to management and project team members
Functional specs and other documentation given as requirements to engineering teams
Ability to identify and communicate effort, risks and dependencies to project team members/stakeholders
Relationships with business users and technical teams
Delivery of high quality solutions meeting business requirements
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Evolver is a technology company serving the Federal, Commercial, and Legal markets that addresses client challenges in the present and transitions clients into the future by introducing efficient and effective IT solutions. Established in 2000, Evolver has successfully grown to be a trusted technology leader. Evolver’s efforts and growth have been recognized by leading publications and organizations, including Inc. 5000 for five consecutive years, and most recently “Future 50” from SmartCEO. With a dedicated focus on client satisfaction, Evolver has proven its value time and time again, from managing day-to-day operations to skillfully navigating the implementation and support of new technologies. Evolver’s core competencies are infrastructure, application development, cybersecurity, cloud, end-user support, data analytics and legal services.
We believe our employees are key to our success and continued growth. We attract and retain our diverse workforce by promoting a work-life balance with generous and flexible time off, competitive compensation and benefits, and a commitment to professional development. When you join Evolver, you join a community of talented and dedicated individuals whose abilities, skills, and actions contribute to the success of the company.
Evolver is seeking a Market Data Services Analysis to join our team in San Francisco, CA.

Market Data Services Analyst
Market Data Services aims to manage market data within D&C by providing transparency around all data (including investment, operations and research data) sourced from Market Data and external data providers, documenting feed metadata, contractual obligations, rights of use etc, and helping govern the use of such data across the firm.

The role of Market Data Services analyst is a central role to working across the firm specifically with Legal, Data Governance, IT, InfoSec and Market data consumers in Operations, Equity and Fixed Income Research and Trading to;
Develop a solid understanding of all of the market data vendors and feeds used across D&C.
Document all of the important dimensions around the vendors as well as related products and services, in partnership with IT, Legal, Data Governance, Vendor Management and Market Data consumers (both for internal and external usage of data such as Investment Modeling and Client Reporting).
Develop a framework to improve visibility and transparency into contract terms, rights of use, actual usage across the firm, highlighting potential gaps and exposures
Partner and tag team on specific projects that relate to new or existing vendors, for market data to assess impact from a usage, data governance and contractual perspective, establishing a procurement function and process around Market Data intake and cataloging using tools like Collibra
Partner with Vendor Management to leverage the VM framework and tools to be a principal point of contact on the Market Data services side.
Partner with Vendor Relationship Managers for each of the market data vendors
Develop a framework working with Legal, for new market data contracts and renewals of existing ones to attempt to standardize language around rights of use, use cases as well as SLAs, that should be baked in.
Perform ongoing research on market data provider industry developments that are relevant for D&C and Investment management, documenting logical categories of market data use, and developing a scorecard of capabilities by vendor, helping optimize capabilities vs spend

Previous experience with Market Data in Financial Services is required.
Need to be collaborative and a self-starter
Must possess excellent verbal and written communication skills.
Ability to work at a detailed level, to effectively partner across various functions in the firm to accomplish stated goals.

Experience working in the Financial Services industry and 3-4 years experience
Data Science and/or Business Intelligence project experience preferred
4 year Degree Minimum

At Evolver, we foster teamwork, growth, individuality and entrepreneurialism. We value employee opinions and encourage them to make a difference by getting involved and being thought-leaders. As a part of the Evolver team, we actively promote a working and learning environment that supports a highly qualified workforce and a quality of work life that is based on trust and respect for all employees resulting in a healthy and trusting organizational culture.

Evolver, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer (EOE). Qualified applicants are considered for employment without regard to age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, disability or veteran status. Evolver offers a comprehensive benefits plan including (but not limited to): medical, dental, vision, 401(k), life, AD&D and short term and long term disability insurance.,5+ years of Experience in SQL development methodologies, R and Python Experience using Tableau Experience in Relational Databases Good to have experience in automation in Python andor R Must possess effective verbal and written communication skills Excellent consulting skills and the ability to work effectively with clients and team members,Job Description
Title: Data Scientist/Clinical Contracts Associate - II

Location: Foster City, CA 94404

Duration: 06 months (Extendable)

Manager’s Note :

• 3+ years of data science experience with common data science toolkits and data visualization tools

• Good scripting/programming skill and applied statistics skills, such as distributions, statistical testing, regression, etc. preferred

• Expert in Microsoft programs including, but not limited to, MSWord, PowerPoint, Visio, Access, and Excel

• Knowledge of Oracle, Access, Tableau, SQL, Excel is a Must
Company Description
We are a forward thinking, consultative technology staffing partner delivering customized staffing solutions for contingent and permanent workforce.

Our mission is to make a meaningful difference by opening the door to a world of possibilities that help you Connect, Empower and Succeed! We bring the right talent in front of our clients and conversely, the right clients in front of our talent pool.

Our next generation of staffing solutions deliver:

• The right fit
• Unparalleled results based on our customers’ business need and challenges.
• High impact and an exceptional level of value added service that directly translate to an outstanding quality of talent
• Fully vetted and differentiated talent pool
• An environment that nurtures the tenets of a remarkable talent experience and partnership
• Industry leading commitment to philanthropy and social good
• Talk to us. We would love to share our story and chat about the exciting things we are doing!

Visit us at www.leadstackinc.com,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

BkGZjiKOEe,Role: Business Data Analyst

Location: San Francisco, CA
Duration: Long Term Contract

Job Description:

Key Skills: CDISC, BRIDG, HL7, RIM , IDMP Projects

Business Data Analyst in terms of Data Standards and Data Migration:

· Translating business requirements, process documentation, system/report specifications, integrated data flows and data models into proposed data definitions, metadata specifications, and data variant/dimensional policies creating fit for purpose standards appropriately aligned with industry standards, compliance requirements and internal Data Governance policies and procedures.

· Working with sponsors, standards core and governance teams to define stakeholders, propose data standards and adjudicates feedback from stakeholders Previous experience in managing data and developing data standards.

· Experience with CDISC, BRIDG, HL7 and other related pharma development data standards Data modelling. Understands the concepts and principles of data modelling and is able to produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. Understands industry recognized data modelling patterns and standards and when to apply them. Knowledge of data modeling / architecture principles and techniques.

· Data Management. Awareness of the key aspects of managing data through its lifecycle, including understanding of data ownership, data quality and associated data governance principles.

· Communicating between the technical and the non-technical. Able to listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret between them. Regularly manages stakeholders' expectations, providing proactive and reactive communication. Brings strong written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills.

· Analyze business scenarios that may potentially be solved by implementation of automated systems and/or modifications to business processes. Provide expertise in identification, evaluation, design, development, and deployment of systems and/or processes

Play a key role – as part of a project team or M&E – in delivery of solutions that are cost effective, sustainable, and meet business requirements

Accountable for documentation, which may include, but is not limited to:

· User Requirements

· Functional and/or technical specifications

· Process flow diagrams

· Training documentation and/or work instructions

· Depending on the application and/or function, may configure system settings and/or options

· Provide consultation to customers regarding enhancement/improvement of current solutions and implementation of new solutions – both systems and processes

· Facilitate and/or support customers in UAT planning and execution

· Participate in and advise roadmap discussions; key member of vendor assessment teams

· Drive resolution of business or systems issues

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Position 11

Position Title: Web Data Analyst | CA, USA | 5+ Years

Position Duties:
Analyze data, develop visually compelling dashboards, generate actionable insights and present recommendations to stakeholders. Monitor and analyze date from websites; Access information from data from reporting systems and explain to stakeholders in a comprehensible and actionable way.
Requirement:
Bachelor’s degree or foreign equivalent in Computer Science, Commerce or related field with 5 years of experience in this or related position and measurable experience in SQL, Adobe Site Catalyst, Clarabridge, TeaLeaf, Opinion Lab. May require travel/relocation to client sites.
Job Location/Where To Apply:
SACC, Inc., 2903 Bunker Hill Lane, Ste. 107, Santa Clara, CA 95054.

Mail your resumes to: recruit@saccinc.com,Description:

Pharma Domain Mandatory

Business Data Analyst in terms of Data Standards and Data Migration:

· Translating business requirements, process documentation, system/report specifications, integrated data flows and data models into proposed data definitions, metadata specifications, and data variant/dimensional policies creating fit for purpose standards appropriately aligned with industry standards, compliance requirements and internal Data Governance policies and procedures.

· Working with sponsors, standards core and governance teams to define stakeholders, propose data standards and adjudicates feedback from stakeholders Previous experience in managing data and developing data standards.

· Experience with CDISC, BRIDG, HL7 and other related pharma development data standards Data modelling. Understands the concepts and principles of data modelling and is able to produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. Understands industry recognized data modelling patterns and standards and when to apply them. Experience in data modeling / architecture principles and techniques.

· Data Management. Awareness of the key aspects of managing data through its lifecycle, including understanding of data ownership, data quality and associated data governance principles.

· Communicating between the technical and the non-technical. Able to listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret between them. Regularly manages stakeholders' expectations, providing proactive and reactive communication. Brings strong written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills.

· Analyze business scenarios that may potentially be solved by implementation of automated systems and/or modifications to business processes. Provide expertise in identification, evaluation, design, development, and deployment of systems and/or processes,Position Lead Data Analyst Location San Francisco CA Fulltime- 90K per annum Breakdown of Day to Day tasks 30 Meeting business stakeholders to gatherdiscuss business requirements 20 Business systems and data analysis 20 DocumentingBuilding technical specification 30 Working with engineering team development satisfies business functional requirements Top 3 hard skills, stack ranked Business systems analysis, data analysis (Teradata, Oracle, Hadoop), problem-solving Data modeling data solutions architecture Communication skills Thanks! Have a great day ahead! Milind PANDEY Work +1-571-443-8720 Mobile 732-456-7098 Email- Milindparkhyatech.com mailtoMilindparkhyatech.com Hangout- milindreqgmail.com mailtomilindreqgmail.com,Job Title: Business Data Analyst

Location: San Francisco, CA

Duration: Long Term

Pharma Domain Mandatory

Business Data Analyst in terms of Data Standards and Data Migration:
Translating business requirements, process documentation, system/report specifications, integrated data flows and data models into proposed data definitions, metadata specifications, and data variant/dimensional policies creating fit for purpose standards appropriately aligned with industry standards, compliance requirements and internal Data Governance policies and procedures.
Working with sponsors, standards core and governance teams to define stakeholders, propose data standards and adjudicates feedback from stakeholders Previous experience in managing data and developing data standards.
Experience with CDISC, BRIDG, HL7 and other related pharma development data standards Data modelling. Understands the concepts and principles of data modelling and is able to produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. Understands industry recognized data modelling patterns and standards and when to apply them. Experience in data modeling / architecture principles and techniques.
Data Management. Awareness of the key aspects of managing data through its lifecycle, including understanding of data ownership, data quality and associated data governance principles.
Communicating between the technical and the non-technical. Able to listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret between them. Regularly manages stakeholders' expectations, providing proactive and reactive communication. Brings strong written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills.
Analyze business scenarios that may potentially be solved by implementation of automated systems and/or modifications to business processes. Provide expertise in identification, evaluation, design, development, and deployment of systems and/or processes
Play a key role as part of a project team or M&E in delivery of solutions that are cost effective, sustainable, and meet business requirements

Accountable for documentation, which may include, but is not limited to:
User Requirements
Functional and/or technical specifications
Process flow diagrams
Training documentation and/or work instructions
Depending on the application and/or function, may configure system settings and/or options
Provide consultation to customers regarding enhancement/improvement of current solutions and implementation of new solutions both systems and processes
Facilitate and/or support customers in UAT planning and execution
Participate in and advise roadmap discussions; key member of vendor assessment teams
Drive resolution of business or systems issues,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

p7WSN0aSbR,Job Description
Essential Functions:

• Designs and enhances databases.

• Designs menu systems that are effective and user-friendly.

• Develops reports with accurate, easy to read, useful information.

• Designs and generates tracking and monitoring tools.

• Participates in the development of outcomes and process measures, including technical specifications, to enable

population measurement, guideline implementation, and evaluation.

• Builds and maintains complex statistical routines using macros, vendor software, and software written by self and others.

• Tests and maintains data integrity across multiple databases (internal SAS, DB2, VSAM; external: Adobe, Excel, SAS

parsing routines, COBOL).

• Builds sophisticated statistical models and forecasting tools using these databases.

• Defines and frames complex multi-dimensional healthcare issues and develops time tables/processes for decision

making.

• Translates needs, issues, and ideas into effective strategies and action plans.

• Formulates specific implementation plans and evaluates the effectiveness of actions/programs implemented.

• Develops creative alternative solutions.

• Works closely with IT and outside partners (and physicians for TPMG departments).

• May coordinate team/project activities and schedules.

• May assist in the determination of goals and priorities with team, clients, or project management sponsors.

• May provide leadership to multi-disciplinary project teams.

• Communicates results/recommendations to project sponsors, clients, and various senior level audiences (including

physicians for TPMG departments).

Basic Qualifications:

Experience:

• Minimum three (3) years of programming in SAS, SQL, VBA, .net or equivalent statistical analytical programming

language.

• Minimum of three (3) years of related analytical consulting experience.

Education:

• Bachelor's degree in economics, finance, health care administration, public health administration, statistics, mathematics,

operations

research, or related field required OR four (4) years of experience in a directly related field.

• High School Diploma or General Education Development (GED) required.

Licenses, Certifications, Registrations

• N/A.

Additional Requirements:

• Broad familiarity with medical practices, especially population management and process and outcomes measurement.

• Experience with MVS/TSO operating systems required

• Experience with analytical manipulation and interpretation of large databases required.

• Microsoft Office skills required.

• Very strong analytic and critical thinking skills, writing skills, communication skills, consulting skills, and ability to work

within a team.

• Ability to express complex analytical and technical information to senior management or to audiences with clinical

training.

• Must be an independent self-starter.

• Must be able to work in a Labor/Management Partnership environment.

Preferred Qualifications:

• Master's degree preferred.

• Analytical consulting experience in the healthcare field.

• Knowledge of JCL strongly preferred.,Job :: Lead Data Analyst

Location San Francisco CA

Duration :: Contract

Brief description of your team function:

The core charter of Credit data services is to build best-in-class data solutions to help bring value to the Credit business. We are looking for an individual who is eager to explore new data, while at the same time is proficient enough in existing data to support business stakeholders looking to leverage it in their last-mile solutions.

The role will involve understanding businessrequirements,conductinghand-on businesssystemsanalysis andtranslating requirementsintotechnicalspecificationsto producescalable and consistentsolutions.

The role will be responsible for supporting global stakeholder departments, working domain leads and data citizens across different GEO's such as Americas, EMEA, and Asia Pacific. This position requires interaction with geographically disbursed business and technical teams requiring the candidate be a self-starter with strong written/verbal communication skills, leadership qualities and project/task management skills.

Breakdown of Day to Day tasks

30% Meeting business stakeholders to gather/discuss business requirements

20% Business systems and data analysis

20% Documenting/Building technical specification

30% Working with engineering team development satisfies business functional requirements

Top 3 hard skills, stack ranked

Business systems analysis, data analysis (Teradata, Oracle, Hadoop), problem-solving

Data modeling & data solutions architecture

Communication skills

What is going to make someone stand out as the best

Bachelor's degree in computer science or engineering discipline with a strong quantitative aptitude

Ability to work with business leads, business stakeholders, subject matter experts and technical staff to gather and develop business needs in the form of technical requirements

Identifying and refining current and futurestate business processes by performing deep dive analysis of current state and propose future state solutions effectively using clear and precise documentation

Motivation to understand business processes and data platforms in order to design/deliver scalable data solutions to support customer needs

Good understanding of database principles and advanced SQL in order to perform complex analysis

Expert understanding of data modelling concepts, experience with data modelling and generating metadata to support relational & non-relational database implementations; experience building logical and physical data models.

Good understanding of distributed systems (Teradata, Hadoop), data movement and optimizing ETL processing of extremely large datasets with specified SLAs.

Collaborate closely with engineering team and provide ongoing support to help implement end user requirements

Ensure the consistency and quality of data solutions completed by engineering team.

Prior knowledge of any analytical visualization tools like Tableau, MSTR is desirable

Document data solutions for easy business consumption.

Strong communication skills, both written and verbal, and skilled at adjusting communication style/vocabulary to an audience's role/function and technical familiarity

How will you determine if the individual is performing well?

Documentation of requirements/needs gathered from business teams

Communications/updates to management and project team members

Functional specs and other documentation given as requirements to engineering teams

Ability to identify and communicate effort, risks and dependencies to project team members/stakeholders

Relationships with business users and technical teams

Delivery ofhigh qualitysolutions meeting business requirements

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Title Data ScientistClinical Contracts Associate - II Location Foster City, CA 94404 Duration 06 months (Extendable) 3+ years of data science experience with common data science toolkits and data visualization tools Good scriptingprogramming skill and applied statistics skills, such as distributions, statistical testing, regression, etc. preferred Expert in Microsoft programs including, but not limited to, MSWord, PowerPoint, Visio, Access, and Excel Knowledge of Oracle, Access, Tableau, SQL, Excel is a Must,Job Title: Sr. Business Data Analyst
Job Duration: 12 Months with strong possible conversion to full time

Job Description:
This role is on the Risk Analytics & MIS team, where we have a simple mission: turn massive amounts of data into actionable insights that ensure seamless, secure commerce experiences across client's physical and digital eco-system. Our analytic and data professionals deliver on this mission by implementing data based solutions, analysis and insights targeted at maintaining security, reducing fraud rates and preserving the integrity of the largest payment processing network in the world.

Data analytics is a critical pillar of the Risk organization. To be successful in this role, you will use strong analytical and leadership skills, contextual business sense and a creative flair to solve real world challenges for us and our clients. Your expertise and insights will serve as a beacon to guide business decisions based on data. Directly reports to the Global Head of Risk Analytics & MIS.

Essential Functions:
Deliver on analytics initiatives for NA + LAC which deliver data-driven insights to internal and external stakeholders. This will include both aesthetic and technical assets, as well as regular ad-hoc work, for internal executive stakeholders, issuing banks, acquirers, processors and merchants. The ability to balance a holistic global view with customized regional delivery is crucial to success. Through collaboration with our client facing teams and functional leaders, you will bring data and insights to bear which deliver mutual, tangible value to us and our clients by way of improved payment security. Specific responsibilities include:

• Execute on the global Risk analytic strategy for specific initiatives and various regional priorities, spearheading creation of data assets and delivery of insights
• Compare client performance against industry best practices; inject new perspectives with a shrewd eye toward identifying performance and/or profitability improvement opportunities. Move the organization from interesting to actionable with recommendations that drive lower fraud rates, more seamless commerce and improved experiences for players in our eco-system
• Craft meaningful presentations and insights from complex data with content that clearly presents opportunities in an accurate, understandable and engaging manner; ensure data driven decision making is a priority for clients, colleagues, and other internal stakeholders
• Identify macro business and market trends that guide areas of future analysis
• Translate understanding of client's products and services into client engagement strategies that yield financial and performance benefits
• Serve as a strategic advisor to organizational leadership and peers – inclusive of Risk MIS team, Regional Risk Officers, Functional/Global leaders and the Regional President.
• Mature how our analytic capabilities are integrated into business processes, improving delivery effectiveness
• Cultivate deep cross-functional partnerships, building relationship capital that facilitates the advancement of holistic/strategic initiatives
• Be an expert at getting to the root of a problem, defining business objectives and formalizing data requirements – especially in a fast paced, fluid environment
• Influence tools and capabilities strategy through experience with various data environments, data sources and tools
• Exceptional risk and/or business acumen and technical rigor – be able to seamlessly shift between working with data to conversations with executives

Must Have Skills:
Big data experience (Hadoop, Hive, Spark, GBI).
Data visualization experience (Tableau) and/or SQL experience are critical skills.
This role is about both doing and delivering
Strong verbal, written, motivational and interpersonal skills are required.

Basic Qualifications:
8+ years of work experience with a Bachelor's Degree; 7 years of work experience with an Advanced degree (e.g. Masters/MBA/JD/MD); or a minimum of 5 years of work experience with a PhD

Preferred Qualifications:
• 12+ years of experience with a Bachelor's Degree (quantitative field preferred) or 10 years of experience with an Advanced Degree (quantitative or business degree highly desirable). Demonstration of progressive success in roles of increasing responsibility
• Possess a relentless, client-centric and result-driven mindset coupled with strong problem solving skills and an ability to break down complex problems and propose alternative, new ways of thinking.
• Expertise in delivering data insights, strategic planning and analytic strategy is highly desirable
• Extensive experience in risk, banking or financial services is required. Knowledge of the payments industry is highly desirable
• Risk operations or Risk analytics experience or similar quantitative business responsibility for financial or operational performance highly desirable
• Strong understanding of manipulating data from a variety of sources
• Big data experience (Hadoop, Hive, Spark), data visualization experience (Tableau) and/or SQL experience are critical skills – this role is about both doing and delivering
• Strong verbal, written, motivational and interpersonal skills are required.

Work Hours:
Incumbent must make themselves available during core business hours. May require occasional meetings outside of core business hours to connect with global partners.

Physical Requirements:
This position will be performed in an office setting. The position will require the incumbent to sit and stand at a desk, communicate in person and by telephone, frequently operate standard office equipment, such as telephones and computers.

Can work Remote/Virtual - Will be supporting two regions LAC and NA, must be able to work core hours.

#LI-FRESH,Role: Data Integrity Analyst
Location: Foster City
Type: Contract
Length: Dec 31, 2020 to start, likely extensions

Description:
Perform "Data risk assessments, incident investigations, write summary reports, suggest remediations in cGMP operations. For this, a consultant needs to have an understanding of computer system validation, pharmaceutical manufacturing, lab testing, supply chain process and quality management systems.
Able to create various types of (business, data) process maps for risk assessments.
Able to perform compliance gap assessments, risk assessments. Need to have strong critical/analytical/logical thinking skills.
Need to have a good presentation skills. (A good storyteller)
Analyze data and prepare metrics. It will be helpful if the consultant is familiar with analytics tools like a spreadsheet, Microsoft powerBI, Tableau.,Key Skills: CDISC, BRIDG, HL7, RIM , IDMP Projects

Business Data Analyst in terms of Data Standards and Data Migration:

· Translating business requirements, process documentation, system/report specifications, integrated data flows and data models into proposed data definitions, metadata specifications, and data variant/dimensional policies creating fit for purpose standards appropriately aligned with industry standards, compliance requirements and internal Data Governance policies and procedures.
· Working with sponsors, standards core and governance teams to define stakeholders, propose data standards and adjudicates feedback from stakeholders Previous experience in managing data and developing data standards.
· Experience with CDISC, BRIDG, HL7 and other related pharma development data standards Data modelling. Understands the concepts and principles of data modelling and is able to produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. Understands industry recognized data modelling patterns and standards and when to apply them. Knowledge of data modeling / architecture principles and techniques.
· Data Management. Awareness of the key aspects of managing data through its lifecycle, including understanding of data ownership, data quality and associated data governance principles.
· Communicating between the technical and the non-technical. Able to listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret between them. Regularly manages stakeholders' expectations, providing proactive and reactive communication. Brings strong written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills.
· Analyze business scenarios that may potentially be solved by implementation of automated systems and/or modifications to business processes. Provide expertise in identification, evaluation, design, development, and deployment of systems and/or processes

Play a key role – as part of a project team or M&E – in delivery of solutions that are cost effective, sustainable, and meet business requirements
Accountable for documentation, which may include, but is not limited to:
· User Requirements
· Functional and/or technical specifications
· Process flow diagrams
· Training documentation and/or work instructions
· Depending on the application and/or function, may configure system settings and/or options
· Provide consultation to customers regarding enhancement/improvement of current solutions and implementation of new solutions – both systems and processes
· Facilitate and/or support customers in UAT planning and execution
· Participate in and advise roadmap discussions; key member of vendor assessment teams
· Drive resolution of business or systems issues

Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,Role: Business Data Analyst
Location: San Francisco, CA
Contract Position/Full Time Position

Business Data Analyst in terms of Data Standards and Data Migration:
Translating business requirements, process documentation, system/report specifications, integrated data flows and data models into proposed data definitions, metadata specifications, and data variant/dimensional policies creating fit for purpose standards appropriately aligned with industry standards, compliance requirements and internal Data Governance policies and procedures.
Working with sponsors, standards core and governance teams to define stakeholders, propose data standards and adjudicates feedback from stakeholder's previous experience in managing data and developing data standards.
Experience with CDISC, BRIDG, HL7 and other related pharma development data standards Data modeling. Understands the concepts and principles of data modeling and is able to produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. Understands industry recognized data modeling patterns and standards and when to apply them. Knowledge of data modeling / architecture principles and techniques.
Data Management. Awareness of the key aspects of managing data through its lifecycle, including understanding of data ownership, data quality and associated data governance principles.
Communicating between the technical and the non-technical. Able to listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret between them. Regularly manages stakeholders' expectations, providing proactive and reactive communication. Brings strong written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills.
Analyze business scenarios that may potentially be solved by implementation of automated systems and/or modifications to business processes. Provide expertise in identification, evaluation, design, development, and deployment of systems and/or processes.
Diverse Lynx LLC is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive due consideration for employment without any discrimination. All applicants will be evaluated solely on the basis of their ability, competence and their proven capability to perform the functions outlined in the corresponding role. We promote and support a diverse workforce across all levels in the company.,We are looking for Business Intelligence Analyst for San Ramon, CA and San Jose, CA locations.

Should have exp on Requirement Gathering in BI project
Must have experience in Business Objects
Should have experience in Oracle, Sql and Customer interaction.
Preference will be given to local candidates.
Total 6+ years experience.
BS in Computer Science, information systems or Computer Engineering requid. MS is preferred.
Thanks

Amanpreet Sharma
Ph: (925) 973-0000 x 203(Off)
Fax: (408) 273-6002 | Email: aman@allianceit.com

Apply,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

OQfr6G4OTb,Client -Cognizant Location - San Francisco , CA Mode - Contract bull 5+ years of experience in IT and banking field with 3+ experience in SQL ServerOracle or other database query language bull Understand and update business reporting and processes which will reduce duplication of data, reduce data entry into multiple systems and facilitate quicker data driven business decisions and document the details for technology team to understand bull Work with end users, business analysts and developers to streamline data flowing in to the applications. bull Export and manipulate data from business systems to be used in reports and analysis bull Setup graphs and presentations to visually represent information using Excel andor Tableau bull Experience with creating, documenting, and maintaining processes bull Develop presentations and produce clear data visualizations for multiple levels of staff, management, and variety of stakeholders bull Implement methods to improve data reliability and quality bull Creative in solving problems, especially thinking outside-the-box to come up with solutions bull An ideal resource loves working with data bull Strong analytical skills with high attention to detail and accuracy bull Excellent verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills Nice to Have bull FinanceBanking background bull Experience or have good understanding of Data Governance domain,Job Description
Our clients Global Sales Analytics team is seeing a smart, dynamic, and strategic Senior Data Analyst to build and deploy dashboards and reporting to make data
-driven decisions that enable our Field Organizations to maximize profitability. You should expect to support their BI infrastructure, manage consistent data flows among different data sources, and look into Data Quality issues and address them on a day to day basis. Our ideal candidate must have a background in both data management (Snowflake) and Analytics (Tableau) with some understanding of Go
-To
-Market operations.

:

*Leverage business intelligence tools including Tableau, Excel spreadsheets and SQL to create models and dashboards that can be leveraged with cross
-functional teams to answer key business questions.
*Work with our Data Technology team to extract, transform, and load data from a wide variety of data sources.
*Understand Data Models and metadata to support ad
-hoc and pre
-built reporting.
*Own the maintenance of ongoing metrics, reports, analyses and dashboards etc. to drive key business decisions.
*Recognize and adopt best practices in reporting and analysis: data integrity, test design, analysis, validation, and documentation.
*Analyze and solve problems at their root, stepping back to understand the broader context.
*Use data mining, model building, and other analytical techniques.

*Strong understanding of modern machine learning techniques and their mathematical concepts and real world application
*3+ years of professional experience in data science or engineering around build and shipping machine learning or statistical models.
*Self
-starter with a passion and curiosity for solving unstructured mathematical problems and ability to manipulate large data sets
*Expert SQL skills
*Strong visualization skills and experience with BI tools (ex: Tableau, Looker, Domo)
*Outstanding quantitative background: BS in Computer Science, Statistics, Math, Physics or other technical field preferred.,Job Description
Duration: 6 months to start/will be extended beyond
Work location: San Francisco-when the shelter-in-place restriction has been lifted
***Local candidates only
Seeking a Sr Data Analyst to play a critical role building and supporting data infrastructure, analysis and supporting systems. You will be responsible for the architecture, design and maintaining data models. Collaborate with other Information System teams to provide enterprise-wide data.
Duties & responsibilities:
- Design and maintain data structures including relational and dimensional data frameworks to support production/regulatory reporting and analytics; and establishing best practices.
- Design, build, support data models for reporting, adhoc analysis, and advanced analytics.
- Become a subject matter expert on operations data and help educate fellow team members
- Ensure data governance and lineage is maintained for new structures.
- Design historical and integrated data logic.
- Consult in problem solving and performance tuning of data model/structures.
- Establish a partnership enterprise data management teams.
- Collaborate with peers, providing efficient data model/structures, information to enable reporting, metrics and presentations.
- Provide extracts and data analysis
Qualifications:
- Collaborate across people, processes, and technology/tools within a highly intensive and complex data environment.
- Be self-directed to complete multiple tasks and meet aggressive timelines.
- Communicate effectively; in both written and verbal formats.
- Be comfortable presenting and tailoring communication approaches based on the audience.
- Be a great influence and consensus builder with a positive attitude, who motivates self and others.

Requirements:
- 3 yrs+ SQL Server T-SQL script writing exp
- 3 yrs+ VB Script/VB/VBA or Python development
- 3 yrs+ process and data flow diagrams
- 3 yrs+ MS Access 2010 or later
- 3 yrs+ of reporting, analytics, or modeling exp
- 3 yrs+ of application/data architecture and solution design exp
-Must have financial services and/or banking exp
Preferred exp:
- Strong analytical skills with high attention to detail and accuracy
- Extensive knowledge and understanding of research and analysis
- Excellent verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills
- Knowledge and understanding of data governance challenges and approaches, metadata, data quality, and data stewardship
- Ability to work effectively in a team environment and across all organizational levels, where flexibility, collaboration, and adaptability are important
- Ability to exercise independent judgment and creative problem solving techniques
- Ability to influence across all organizational levels and particularly senior management,Job Title BI Data Analyst Location South San Francisco, California The Position We are seeking a talented and experienced data analyst to contribute to and help with the development of informatics systems in Development Sciences Informatics (DevSci Informatics). In this position the candidate will work on complex data visualizations as a member of the Informatics Systems team. Development Sciences is a translational science organization that plays a critical role in Genentech Research and Early Development development of products at Roche. DevSci Informatics is accountable for leading the strategy and execution around data lifecycle management, data standards, analytics infrastructure, ongoing data operations and informatics systems. Requirements TIBCO Spotfire visualization and analytics expertise Intermediate R programming skills Simple SQL programming skills database knowledge General understanding of RD processes and the scientific data lifecycle . Outstanding communication, collaboration, and analytical skills Excellent team work Education Bachelor's or higher degree in a life sciences or computing field with three to four years of experience in BiotechPharmaceutical RD,Position: Data Analyst - Life Sciences
Location: Foster City, CA
Type: Contract

Description :
Data Analysis, identifying the patterns and business rules can be applied to the corporate repositories.
Support of the SMEs and data owners in the data entry review process including but not limited by bulk data loads, training sessions.
Investigating and addressing data issues/ tickets and ensuring the data quality to reduce future data tickets
Maintain the data dictionary, ensure the inheritance of the corporate standard naming conventions and rules
Creating and implementing the data government processes to ensure the data quality and SLAs.
Requirements:
Should have 2+ years of working experience on...
SQL Server and Oracle database
SQL, T-SQL & PL/SQL,
SSMS /r SQLDeveloper knowledge
Knowledge of Key Database concepts, relational data models, non-structured data models, dimensional data models
Excellent Communication skills
Basic ETL (import and export data between databases, spreadsheets and other sources)
Lifesciences/Lab background preferable,Data Analyst

BCforward is currently seeking highly motivated Data Analyst for an opportunity in Indianapolis, IN 46204.

Position Title: Data Analyst
Location: Indianapolis, IN 46204
Expected Duration: 12 Months contract
Hours: 8:00 to 4:45 pm

Purpose of Position/Summary:
The purpose of this position is to minimize morbidity and mortality associated with COVID-19 among Indiana residents by conducting a broad and complex range of informatics and analytical activities as part of the NBS/Surveillance team. The scope of this position includes but is not limited to surveillance of COVID-19, assistance in surveillance, response, and guidance to other program areas outside of the ERC.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities:
Manage and analyze infectious disease data collected through routine surveillance, public health investigations, and applied epidemiologic studies
Manage and analyze data collected through routine for other client divisions as necessary
Provide consultation and technical assistance to client epidemiologists, local health departments, and the public with respect to infectious diseases or other assigned projects within client
Work directly with programmer and developer staff on making system improvements
Assist client epidemiologist in conducting data analysis
Assist in the development of program logic models and quality improvement projects
Prepare and disseminate written and oral reports and presentations that communicate necessary information to internal and external partners
Participate in writing grants and other funding proposals
Serve as a backup to other data analysts
Perform related duties as assigned.
Education:
A master's degree in a relevant field (e.g., public health, biological sciences, statistics, etc.) and 2 years' relevant experience, OR
A doctoral-level degree in epidemiology or another relevant field, OR
A graduate or professional degree in a health-related field (e.g., RN, MD/DO, DDS/DMD, DVM, PhD, RS) with specific epidemiology training (e.g., MPH degree, CDC Epidemic Intelligence Service, or CSTE Applied Epidemiology Fellowship), OR
A bachelor's degree in a relevant field and 4 years of relevant public health experience.
Knowledge, skills, and abilities:
Expertise in software or languages use to manipulate and analyze data, including SQL and either Python or R
Experience analyzing datasets and querying databases
Cursory experience with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
Strong understanding of machine learning concepts and tools
Knowledge of state laws and regulations as well as federal public health guidance documents pertaining to infectious diseases
Skill in identification of public health problems pertinent to Indiana residents
Skill in managing large complex datasets, data cleaning, and conducting common and descriptive and statistical analyses
Demonstrated attention to detail and organization
Able to communicate effectively with a variety of team members including epidemiologists, public health staff, developers/programmers, and other project personnel.
About BCforward:
BCforward began as an IT business solution and staffing firm. Founded in 1998, BCforward has grown with our customers' needs into a full-service personnel solution's organization. Headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana, BCforward also operates numerous delivery centers across North America and India. We are currently the largest consulting firm and largest MBE certified firm in Indiana. Our uninterrupted growth has allowed BCforward to deliver uniquely configured IT staffing and project solutions for over the years of catering to our customers' specific needs. BCforward currently maintains a team of over 5000 global resources. With our additional brand, Stafforward, together we have the capabilities to deliver services for a variety of industries in both public and private sectors which allows us to address your most challenging needs.

www.BCforward.com

www.facebook.com/bcforward
We must inform you that during the hiring process, we may ask for you to disclose and provide us with various categories of your personal information, including identifiers such as your name and address, professional information, commercial information, education information, and other related information. Please note that we will only use this information to facilitate and complete the recruiting process. This posting is not an offer of employment. All applicants must be authorized to work in the United States and willing to cooperate with a background check and drug screen, to the extent permitted by federal and local laws up to and including both criminal and financial reviews. The submission of intentionally false or fraudulent information in response to this job posting shall render the applicant ineligible for the position. BCforward is an equal opportunity employer. Any subsequent offer of employment shall be considered employment at will regardless of the anticipated assignment duration.

Interested candidates please send resume in Word format Please reference job code 108950 when responding to this ad.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

vB2oWAjgLT,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

nKYZjQLFL8,We are hiring a Data Analyst to maintain databases and master data for one of our pharmaceutical client's product research wing. The data analyst will utilize established processes and serve as a key technical resource at the operational level. They will drive master data solutions for the local site. They will also provide on-going support for completing tasks associated with the SAP master data/specification responsibilities and projects including but not limited to the following:* Execute data collection, data entry, data verification, and data cleansing in SAP and associated systems per established processes and procedures* Second person verify SAP master data entries for new master data requests and changes to existing data.* Assist in creation and maintenance of material specifications managed by the product research group.* Use change management process and tools.* Create, change, maintain, and inactivate SAP master data utilizing established processes, tools, and procedures.* Assist with Periodic Review of material specifications and update appropriate systems per established processes and procedures.* Be proactive in maintaining data accuracy in recognition of its criticality to running our business.* Identify and address issues as they arise, and escalate them to supervision and/or business sponsor when issues are outside of one's scope to remedy.* Be able to train others on tasks they perform.* Comply with local and global SOPs/policies.* Maintain a safe work environment, working safely and accountable for supporting all Health Safety and Environmental Corporate and Site Goals.* Maintain learning plan at a 100% compliance level in accordance with all government regulations and Global Policies and Procedures* Experience with SAP master data entry* Strong attention to detail and work accuracy* Strong organizational skills* Ability to manage multiple priorities and meet timelines* Ability to build collaborative working relationships* Knowledge of and compliance with GMP requirements* Critical thinking and problem solving skills* Good written and verbal communication skills* Learning agility and self-management skills* Ability to learn a variety of IT systems and tools (e.g. SAP, cMat, Excel tools, Trackwise, SharePoint, Regulus) General business understanding of clinical trial data governance and supply chain* Quality background is helpful.16 days of PTOMedical, Dental and Vision benefits401(k) enrollment option with 3% employer matching,"W2 candidates are encouraged to apply. We are unable to sponsor H1b or work with third-party candidates at this time.

Job Description:
The client is in need of a seniorData Analyst that can create SSRS reports and pull data from complicated Microsoft SQL Server 2016 databases using SQL Server Management Studio and SQL Server Data Tools.
Ability to write complex SQL queries and create SSRS reports.
Ability to create clear and complete documentation about data, reports, and processes.
Prior experience with DotNet technology (C#, VB, etc.) and Microsoft Visual Studio 2013 and above is useful.
Must have strong communication skills and the ability to create clear and complete documentation about data, reports, and processes.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

pZp91C2z2N,Employee Sub-Group: Regular FT Hourly
Work Schedule:
Location: Redmond , Washington
Position Title: Data 1

Req: 26618

Technical Data Analyst (Games)

(Location- Seattle, Washington area)

Are you an experienced data analyst who takes pride in mining data and building actionable insights? Do you want to help one of the world's most ambitious, innovative, and customer-centric game studios develop and launch cutting edge games? Well, Lionbridge is looking for you!

We are looking for a Technical Data Analyst to join our team. Suitable candidates are self-guided, energetic, and analytic problem solvers. To be successful in this role, you will need to be able to work on tight deadlines and have exceptional technical and communication skills.

Role Responsibilities
Retrieve and process data using a broad set of data technologies and resources, knowing how, when, and which to use
Write high-quality SQL queries to retrieve and analyze data from database tables
Build Business Intelligence applications to surface and report data and insights
Investigate data quality and implementation issues and ensure successful rollout of signals and ongoing telemetry health
Prepare specifications, documentation, reports, and presentation materials
Build trust and respect with people outside of the inner immediate team
Facilitate communication within groups
Conduct root cause analysis against uncovered issues
Work closely with the team lead to deliver requested daily results
Contribute to a culture of innovation and quality
Work closely with business partners on assigned tasks
Qualifications
BA/BS in Engineering, Computer Science, Statistics, Mathematics, Data Science, or related quantitative discipline
2+ years of experience as an analyst or engineer in data or business intelligence space
2+ years of work experience in analyzing and interpreting data using SQL
Proficiency in navigating GIT, work experience is preferred
Experience in using Microsoft Visual Studio.
Experience with BI data visualization and delivery tools such as Power BI, Tableau, etc.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills
Self-driven, meticulous and curious in nature
Ability to prioritize in a complex and fast-paced environment
Ability to learn new technology and tools,Job Description
Job duties/description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

gneqzUUGfJ,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

reMStk4yza,This is Gowtham from Wipro We do have great opportunity, please find the JD and let me know if you are interested. Position Data Analyst Duration Full time Location Redmond WA 1) Someone that is comfortable working with Cosmos and Kusto or can learn those things pretty fast and help us in the data pipeline 2) Knows how to write web UI (experimentation design web site) 3) Reasonable coding skills in C and a knowledge how to automate stuff with PowerShell,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

29h6xcF1ru,You absolutely love data (unstructured and structured), testing hypotheses, and arriving at data-driven recommendations that have an immediate impact on the business. You have a strong business insight and exceptional critical thinking that you employ to turn data insights into strategic action. You are passionate about communicating insights as much as you are about discovering them in the first place. You constantly ask questions about how to use analytics to improve the business and constantly make impactful strategic decisions. You have a passion for marketing and a desire to use data to optimize performance. You enjoy collaborating with teams across digital and traditional channels to understand and support their goals. RESPONSIBILITIES Perform data analysis activities and work closely with end users (both internal and external clients) to translate requirements into data-driven applications and data visualization solutions (e.g. reporting and dashboards) Create near real-time reporting solutions blending data from various sources Assist the team in the production of analytic products (e.g., reports, data analyses) Interpret data using statistical techniques Maintain and monitor reporting tools in Power BI, Spotfire etc. Work with management to prioritize business information needs Collaborate effectively with Engineers, Data Scientists, and Product Owners to implement project work and develop predictive models. Craft and maintain technical documents Participate in on-call rotation for off-hours support Engage in product roadmap creation for BI to define the capabilities of the platforms and services and delivery timelines Identify and drive initiatives for improving team performance QUALIFICATIONS 10+ years of experience in data analysis, data visualization, ETL, and analytics. Hands-on experience with BI tools and reporting software (e.g. MicroStrategy, Tableau, Power BI, Excel) Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, prioritize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy Understanding of dimensional database modeling. Excellent data presentation skills, utilizing dashboards and other technologies. Excellent verbal and written communication skills. Ability to design and implement projects with minimal guidance. Experience with Agile methodologies. Adept at querying, report writing and presenting findings PREFERRED EXPERIENCE M.S. in Computer Science, Mathematics or equivalent Experience working with SQL Server, Azure, and Snowflake Experience writing and debugging complex SQL queries Experience with source control ( git preferred ),Position Big Data Quality AnalystHadoop Testing analyst(Big DataHadoop Tester) Location Seattle, WA Duration 10+ Months middot Hands on testing experience on Hadoop systems and Web Services. middot Hands on experience on accessing files in HDFS, Data fabrication data compares middot Strong working experience on SQL, Joints and ETL middot Knowledge on Java, Test Data and Test methodologies Additional skills middot Experience in High Volume Data Testing middot Knowledge on ETL and Abilities concepts middot Any Experience on Talent Micro Strategy,Title BIData Analyst- Configuration Lead Location KIRKLAND ,WA Java, SQLExperience with developing and productionizing data processing pipeline using tools like Apache Beam, Spark andor FlinkData visualization and dashboard creation Experience with statistical modeling approaches.Experience implementing software to make data accessible through simple Web and APIs. Preferred skills Experience with query development and data management tools like PLX.Experience with creating effective data visualizations using tools like Data Studio and Tableau Experience using Flume Java Tech The job role would require knowledgeability to learn the following technologiesFrontend Angular DartBackend JavaTools Plx, Data Studio,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

5yFUnwF5AQ,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

NGrFVUZHDO,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

YIeLtS1wpI,Travel requirement up to 60 in U.S. and Canada. Summary Our client is seeking multiple SAP Data Analysts for a large global IT SAP implementation project. The SAP Data Analyst role oversees data conversion activities for one or more SAP deployment projects at a time. They possess SAP and data conversion subject matter expertise along with efficient communication skills. Requirements 5+ years of experience working within SAP data. Recent and efficient experience creating and building Bill of Materials (BOM) in SAP PP and MM modules to support Supply Chain and Operations teams. Experienced in completing full data chain, collectingcleansing data, and constructing data from multiple ERP sources for uploading into SAP. Effective communication skills, as they will be working directly with business units.,­­As a member of the company’s information technology team, the Data Analyst is responsible for organizing, analyzing and presenting information to be consumed by the business. The position will participate in requirement specifications with the business and will contribute to the overall design and implementation of the evolving data analytic solutions including dashboards, reports and other systems.

Duties:
Deliver innovative solutions that provide value to both internal and external end users
Develop and maintain productive working relationships with internal clients and other team members
Participate and lead in data governance discussions and activities
Report status to stakeholders, sponsors and leadership across the organization
Facilitate change management in areas affected by analytics/development activities. Prioritize and track all issues to resolution, escalating issues as needed
Comply with Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) methodology and compliance obligations
Train on and support the use of various applications/software, reporting and dashboard systems
Participate in quality assurance and quality control practices, standards, methodologies and metrics associated with assignments
Ability to quickly understand and use proposed third-party vendor tools
Promote and demonstrate the behaviors consistent with CoreSite’s culture and 8 Guiding Principles
Other projects and duties as assigned
Requirements

Knowledge, Skills & Abilities:
Excellent communication and inter-personal skills including: communicating at technical and business levels, and the ability to interact with people from all organizational levels
Self-starter and fast learner
Ability to collect and analyze data to assist in decision making
Strong problem solving, analytical and decision making skills
Hands on experience with Einstein Analytics platform a plus
Hands on experience with machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches and tools a plus
Experience with multiple reporting and dashboard platforms a plus
Experience with Salesforce a plus
Experience with MS SQL Server a plus
Experience with Python and R a plus
Accomplished in using best practices for gathering and documenting complete and detailed requirements
Strong documentation skills
Ability to adapt to new software applications and products
Education/Experience:
Bachelor’s Degree in math/statistics, computer science or related studies
5+ years supporting a variety of business units related to data analytics and reporting
Physical Demands:

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

While performing the duties of this job, the employee is occasionally required to stand; walk; sit; use hands to handle, or feel objects; reach with hands and arms; climb stairs; balance; stoop or kneel; talk and hear. The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds.

Benefits

Not only does CoreSite have a fun, team-focused work environment, but we also offer great benefits!
Medical and Vision coverage through Cigna Heath Care
Telemedicine through MDLive
Dental Insurance through Delta Dental
Life Insurance and Short-Term & Long-term Disability Insurance fully paid by the company
Voluntary coverage benefits for Life and AD&D, Critical Illness, Accident Coverage, and Hospital Indemnity
Medical and Dependent Care Flexible Spending Account (FSA) Plans and Health Saving Account (HSA) Plans
401(k) retirement savings plan with a generous company contribution
Free parking or a company contribution toward a public transit pass
16 days of Personal Time Off (PTO)
10 paid Holidays
Wellness program with annual incentive
Applicant Privacy Notice: CoreSite is committed to protecting the privacy and security of personal information submitted by applicants. The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) requires us to provide you information about our personal information handling practices. As a result, we’re providing this Privacy Notice that describes how we collect, use, share, and update personal information from individuals who wish to be considered for employment with CoreSite. To read the Applicant Privacy Notice, please go to https://www.coresite.com/applicant-privacy-notice.,The Data Analyst is responsible for the all data management activities, reporting and analytics. The Data Analyst will be responsible for building on and evolving the current state of reporting and analytical capabilities to a proactive state. The Data Analyst is responsible for establishing data policies, standards, organization and enforcement. Responsibilities Building and executing People Data strategy Lead data reporting, analytics and interpretation for HR lifecycle of events succession planning, workforce planning, talent review, etc. Champion a data-driven culture, and organize and implement data governance policies, procedures, roles and responsibilities for the effective management of HR information Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports and mine data insights that are valuable to the organization Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databasesdata systems Filter and ldquocleanrdquo data by reviewing computer reports from multiple sources Locate and define new process improvement opportunities including providing data and tools targeting more proactive analysis Requirements The requirements listed above and below are representative of the knowledge, skill, andor ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. Job qualifications and requirements include 2-4 years of working experience as a data analyst, experience in people analytics preferred Intermediate to advanced proficiency with reporting and analysis applications (Excel and Tableau) Strong analytical skills httpsresources.workable.comanalytical-skills-interview-questions with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy Technical expertise httpsresources.workable.comdata-scientist-analysis-interview-questions regarding data formatting and visualization, preferred experience with Alteryx. Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages, databases and tools Experience analyzing datasets Strong ability to communicate information and analyses verbally and through written and graphical means using modern presentation tools Bachelorrsquos Degree. Preferably in Data Science, Mathematics, Economics, Computer Science or Information Management Highly organized with strong project management skills, and drive to meet organizational and departmental objectives ability to manage projects on interrelated timelines. Demonstrated ability to communicate with and work well with all levels within an organization,Title Data Analyst Location Denver, CO (Downtown) Duration 6+ Months (Perm) Key Skills Database, ETL skills with SQL Server, T-SQL stored procs, Power BI (Matrix dashboard design knowledge) Data Analysis and documentation Strong business-facing communication skills Exposure to JSON ( Strongly desirable) Exposure to Python scripting (desirable) Power BI andor Azure ML,Designation Data Analyst Location Denver, CO Job Type Fulltime Comfortable working with massive datasets in real time and batch processing with superior analytics skills Apply data mining techniques, do statistical analysis, and build high quality prediction systems integrated with our product. Doing ad-hoc analysis and presenting results in a clear manner. Processing, cleansing, and verifying the integrity of data used for analysis Enhancing data collection procedures to include information that is relevant for building analytic systems Data mining using state-of-the-art methods. Create automated anomaly detection systems and constant tracking of its performance. MUST HAVE Tableau or other visualization tool experience Strong SQL experience ELK Stack HDFS Hadoop Hive Linux AWS Big Data Tools S3, Kinesis, Red Shift, Athena Java, Python, R, SQL Predictive Analytics Kafka Confluent CI CD and Cloud Native Computing (Docker, Kubernetes, Consul, Vault),Greenwood Village, Colorado
Skills : sql
Description :
Required Qualifications:
3-5+ years of data analyst experience
Hive, Kibana, and/or Splunk
Strong investigative skills and highly analytical mindset
Troubleshooting API calls
SQL
Bonus Skills:
Experience with connected devices such as Xbox, Roku, PlayStation, etc. (this doesn’t have to be professional, this could be in spare time)
Interest in cord-cutting technologies
Cable/telecom background
Responsibilities:
Work on a data platform team responsible for conducting client investigations through data in order to solve customer issues
Triage customer feedback from applications
Test and certify products for release to application stores
Work on customer issues and outages
Document product/testing changes
Work in a cross-functional environment with several internal stakeholderssql,LONG TERM ASSIGNMENT WITH OPPORTUNITY TO BE EXTENDED OR GO PERMANENT BASED ON PERFORMANCE

CORRECT LOCATION: CENTENNIAL, CO
6300 S. Syracuse Way, Ste 555
Centennial CO 80111
DUE TO COVID-19 CANDIDATE WILL WORK FROM HOME UNTIL *** OFFICES ARE RE-OPENED. CANDIDATE WILL BE REQUIRED TO BE ONSITE DAILY ONCE FACILITIES RE-OPEN.
Monday-Friday; 8am-5pm

Interview schedule: Initial 1 hour video interview. Selected candidates will then be scheduled for a panel interview.

The Data Analyst work assignments are varied and frequently require interpretation and independent determination of the appropriate courses of action. The Data Analyst will leverage operational and strategic decision making thru assorted reporting tasks, data interpretation, education, and consultation/collaboration with partners across the enterprise. The candidate should be able to build analysis and tools from multiple data sources that end users can easily learn and maintain.

Responsibilities:
" Data collection and manipulation from numerous sources (Oracle, SQL, Excel, etc.) with an understanding of database structure design
" Analyze data to solve a wide variety of business problems and creation of data visualizations that drive strategic vison
" Passion for contributing to a cross-functional team focused on continuously improving member experiences and clinical outcomes though data analysis and interpretation
" Ensure data quality, timeliness and accuracy
" Process thinking, independent problem solving and working collaboratively with the team

Required Qualifications
" Bachelor's Degree or equivalent experience
" 3+ years of technical experience in data reconciliation
" Expert level MS Excel and highly efficient in SQL
" Proficiency in compiling, analyzing, and interpreting data trends
" The ability to communicate effectively across levels and functions
" Self-starter comfortable working independently to accomplish components of a larger program
" Strong organizational and time management skills
" Demonstrated excellence in problem solving/critical thinking,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

U3aEJwA5dt,Wanted Passionate Innovators!! Leaders with zeal to succeed!! Looking for a change in your current job? Do you wish to join a company that is outperforming the Industry with a strong growth momentum? If your answer is yes, you might be the one CitiusTech is looking forhellip About us CitiusTech is a leading provider of healthcare technology services and solutions to medical technology companies, providers, payers and life sciences organizations. With over 3500+ professionals, we serve over 110+ leading healthcare organizations worldwide. We offer our clients a wide range of services and solutions including healthcare software development, healthcare interoperability, regulatory compliance, consumer engagement, care coordination and population health management. With extensive capabilities in healthcare technology, we have consistently delivered best-in-class solutions at an unmatched cost advantage to its healthcare clients across the world. CitiusTech is closely associated with industry organizations like HIMSS, HL7 and CHIME Foundation. CitiusTech employs over 3500+ professionals globally including 700+ HL7 Certified Professionals and 1,200+ Software Product Engineering Professionals For more information on us, please visit our website www.citiustech.com HealthCare Data Analyst - SQL and Python Location Denver, CO Exp ndash 5 to 7 yrs Key Skill Python, SQL Job Description Expertise in data analyst and SQL, Creative thinker Strong with SQL Preferably with some Python experience Ideally someone who is very strong on the Data Analysis side Slice and dice data Work closely with Data Scientists Interested Candidate may directly email their resume to roshin.kollannoorcitiustech.com,Job Description
Job description

• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports

• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality

• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets

• Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems

• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs

• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities

Requirements

• Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst

• Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques

• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)

• Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy

• Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings

• Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)

Powered by JazzHR

CybIu8l0YW,Greenwood Village, Colorado
Skills : SQL,ETL,Linux,Data Managent
Description : Telecommunications Industry
Insights Engineer
6 Month Contract; extensions possible
Greenwood Village, CO 80111

Required Qualifications:
5-7+ years data experience
SQL
ETL
Linux
AWS
Tableau or PowerBI
Bonus Skills:
Cable/telecom background
Spark
Hadoop
GIT
PIG
YAML
Responsibilities:

Work alongside other Insights Engineers as well as Data Engineers
Main tasks will include performing detailed requirements analysis, documenting processes, working cross functionally with multiple groups and performing some user acceptance testing.
To succeed in this role, the ideal candidate should have strong organizational skills; an analytical way of thinking; and be able to explain difficult concepts to non-technical users.
Evaluate business features, anticipating requirements, uncovering areas for improvement, and handing off requirements to be developed/ implemented.
Lead ongoing reviews of requirements, roadmaps, and developing optimization strategies.
Work with multiple groups to identify metrics, then determine and prioritize work into a backlog.
Effectively communicating your insights and plans to cross-functional team members and management.
Gather critical information from meetings with various stakeholders to create actionable improvements to analytics.
Ensure solutions meet business needs and requirements by testing and working with testing group for high quality implementations.
Manage multiple projects, developing plans, and monitoring performance.
Update, implement and maintain procedures.
Prioritize initiatives based on business needs and requirements.
Serve as a liaison between stakeholders to manage expectations and work through competing priorities.
Monitor deliverables and ensuring timely completion of projects.
Ad hoc Support – proficient in SQL (Hive)
Responsible for Developing, maintaining, and managing advanced reporting, analytics, dashboards and other BI solutions.
SQL,ETL,Linux,Data Managent,Our Government and Large Commercial high-profile clients are high-tech organizations with programs in science, technology, engineering and math. For these positions, they are asking for us to provide data analysts that are passionate about transforming and making data usable for new services, business models, and to help economic development. We are looking for people that believe data is the new gold.

We are looking for data analysts, data engineers, data scientists with excellent leadership, technical, and subject matter expertise qualities. We have projects lining up developing research-grade science data algorithms from in-situ sensors to bringing together data sources from disparate sub-agencies into enterprise platforms to make available on open-data platforms. Our projects vary: creating data and bigdata prototypes whether it be on CartoDB geospatial, D3 Sankeys and various libraries, feeding and harvesting RDF Triplets into catalogs, or integrating into SEO environments. Admittedly, we have some less sexy data wrangling and janitor tasks that will require more ETL skills to hone in on.

To boot, we want our analysts to be natural change agents and passionate about change while empathetic to the clients environment on how they leverage, mature, and incorporate data products, services, and new capabilities. We want leaders who can both support the influence of the right change direction while managing the technical and business analysis and design, and are skilled and self-motivated with solid domain/subject matter expertise.

Our analysts will be on teams that, through facilitated analysis, work shoulder-to-shoulder with teammates to come up with the conceptual and logical design and architecture. Analysts will also be working very closely with client staff or system integrators to rapidly implement changes or agile release. Furthermore, we devise and craft strategies and communications solutions to broadcast and brag about their change efforts and results. This is what we do – we bring transformations to life.

Position Requirements:
You will be expected to rapidly ramp-up on client lingo, proactively make observations of patterns, anomalies, problems, and be customer service focused. You will be expected to be highly self-motivated and understand you will be held accountable to commitments. We look for decisive individuals able to rapidly respond to change requests and able to communicate, track, and escalate risk. We expect you to be proactive, efficient, and ready to learn quickly in response to all client and team member needs. This is a bootcamp-type position setup for growth.

We want you to not only gain technical skills, but also grow your interactive and client facing skills. All roles will require strong communication and interactive skills - oral, written, visual especially for triaging conflict, ideation barriers, mitigating risk, foster thought diversity and team environment. We expect all our roles to have a mastery of their technical level at their role whether that be in architectural methods, languages, work products, consulting techniques, and client culture. If they are not, they need to demonstrate how they are VERY fast learners.

Career Path Tech - Depending on the role: data analysts, data engineers, data scientists, here are some example tech stacks depending on the project). When you interview, the position will specify the tech level and re-validate your interest. What we will want to learn is which path you want to start at, grow in, and move towards. When you apply, let us know your interest and which paths you bring experience to.
Data Analyst Tech - Making Analytics for End Use
Data Engineer Tech – Cleaning and Integrating Dirty Data
Data Scientist Tech- Developing Advanced Algorithms and Models to support analytics
Geospatial Data Scientist Tech – Layering in Geospatial into Data Analysis
Data Analytics App Tech – Developing Analytics Platforms and tools
Data Analytics DB Tech – Developing database solutions to support analytics
Requirements:
1 year of consulting experience – higher compensation for additional 3 more years in related analytical work products and additional 2 more years in subject matter
Could pass ad-hoc technical and whiteboard test given various data ETL and other patterns of real-time, large data, data cleanup, etc. scenarios
For public sector work, our work is traditionally unclassified, but will require certain amount of background, reference, and other checks
Travel will be maximum 20%
We emphasize a balance of work and life and target 40-50 hour weeks with ample times to refresh with great paid-time off.
Opening expected: Summer

We review our requirements quarterly and this could change. We like to plan ahead in finding amazing talent.

About Xentity

We are a fast-growing data consulting and support services firm - focused on large data programs in data types such as geospatial, open, big, and IoT data. Check out www.xentity.com to learn about our focus, services, clients, missions, values as well as our excellent benefits package and career information.

We have high profile clients and projects that our staff really delivery for, as well enjoy knowing they make a large difference.

Our President has a vision to continue to focus on solutions that transform the Next Generation. Using data integration, knowledge solutions, and amazing increases in computing to impact energy, geosciences, land management, we can bring quality and simplifications to existing and new data flow! Imaging being on a team that brings advanced concepts like high performance computing, AI, data science, fuzzy logic, changing interfaces human-computer points mobile or augmented reality and many more disruptions. This truly can put the I back in IT and GIS.... by concentrating on pragmatic knowledge-first data designs, leadership and management, and the all too forgotten focus on outreach and engagement strategies and solutions.

More can be found at careers.xentity.com,Company Description

ClientSolv Technologies is an IT solution firm with over a decade of experience serving Fortune 1000 companies, public sector and small to medium sized companies. ClientSolv Technologies is a woman-owned and operated company that is certified as a WMBE, 8a firm by the Federal government's Small Business Administration.

Job Description

Fully-qualified professional with a broad career level of understanding. Possesses detailed knowledge of one technology or professional discipline, or basic knowledge of several areas. Broad application of principles, theories, and concepts. Uses several techniques to solve complex problems where analysis of situations or data requires a review and analysis of several factors. May lead the implementation of tactical plans in support of strategic initiatives. Receives objectives and determines approach to achieving objectives. Makes decisions but may not have final authority for all aspects of resource commitment. Works under limited supervision. Accountable for the achievement of operational goals in at least one department or work area. Integrates customer/client needs and concerns with business issues. Serves as an advocate for client. Serves as a liaison on specific projects with other work areas. Influences, inspires or persuades others in order to accomplish work objectives.

Qualifications

Bachelor's degree or equivalent education and relevant experience. 2-4 years of experience

Additional Information

1 year Contract

Team player

Initiative taker and out of the box thinker

Hourly rate: $30-32/hr on W2,We are looking for data analysts, data wranglers, data scientists with excellent leadership, technical, and subject matter expertise qualities. We are bringing together data sources from disparate sub-agencies into an enterprise platform to make available on open-data platforms.

To boot, we want our analysts to be natural change agents and passionate about change while empathetic to the clients environment on how they leverage, mature, and incorporate data products, services, and new capabilities. We want leaders who can both support the influence of the right change direction while managing the technical and business analysis and design, and are skilled and self-motivated with solid domain/subject matter expertise.

Our analysts will be on teams that through facilitated analysis, work shoulder-to-shoulder with the clients and our project leadership to get this raw, and sometimes unstructured data into the platform in agile releases. Furthermore, we are working with the extended part of the overall team to devise and craft strategies and communications solutions to broadcast and brag about their change efforts and results.

This is what we do – we bring transformations to life.

Position Requirements:

You will be expected to rapidly ramp-up on Client lingo, proactively make observations of patterns, anomalies, problems, and are customer service focused on being accountable and decisive and able to rapidly respond to change requests. We expect you to be proactive, efficient, and ready to learn quickly, and rapidly in response to all team member needs.

The earlier project goals will be to maintain/update existing ETL scripts primarily in node.js. Soon thereafter, additional new datasets will requiring implement new ETL and automated ETL jobs using a job scheduler (i.e. CRON, AT) for likely 15 data sources in staging environment (linux) based on design from project technical lead. Within the first half of the year, likely a total of 40 datasets, with increasing complexity will require the same level of effort as well as design and additional and documentation of the transforms, implement ETL scripts as well as participating in design of improved data maintenance solution. Some data will be raw, so being creative in problem-solving while meeting client tight goals will be very important. Finally, the project over the period will provide technical support to startup teams for data and open data portal API (Socrata). This will include configuring help desk ticketing solution and resolve tickets and contribute data analyst content to company best practices to help increase quality and pace of responses.

We want to not only gain your technical solutions, but we also want to leverage and grow your interactive and client facing skills. All roles will require strong communication and interactive skills - oral, written, visual especially for triaging conflict, ideation barriers, mitigating risk, foster thought diversity and team environment. The scope will change, so we expect the role to adapt to change and manage expectations, be goal-oriented and self-motivated, and have a customer-oriented (consulting mindset, not "the code works in my environment"). The team likes to coach and explore, so we are looking for life-learners, inherently curious, team players, cooperative, reliable, dependable – basically, you need to rock, but not be a prima-donna rock star.

We expect all our roles to have a mastery of their technical level at their role whether that be in architectural methods, work products, consulting techniques, and client culture. If they are not, they need to demonstrate how they are VERY fast learners.

For the technical prowess, we will want you to demonstrate your data science nerd-dom and technology stack as part of normal vernacular in one or many of these stacks (with the first being default requirement):
Knowledge of software development and computer science fundamentals.
Must be experienced in Node.js, OpenRefine, SQL, FTP
Proficient in at least one common programming language (Node.js, Java, Ruby, C sharp, Python, PERL, PHP, javascript )
Experience with ETL solutions and technologies – SQL, XML, JSON, GeoJSON, Informatica, Kettle, OpenRefine, SAFE/FME, GeoKettle, jQuery, regular expressions, data types and standards, geospatial data.
Basic understanding of Linux shell commands, web application architectures, IP networks, version control (SVN, Git).
Additional credit for GIS transformation: PostGIS, RDBMS/DBA, Esri/ArcGIS, Data Science / Analytics (BI tools, NoSQL, R, MatLab), GEOJson, K-Means, Nearest Neighbor, Anselin Local Moran's, Monte Carlo Simulation, Mantel Index, Standard Deviational Ellipse, GeoServer, ESRI/Hadoop
Candidate should be expert in one of the disruptions cited on the Xentity Home page
1 year of consulting experience – Higher Compensation for additional 3 more years in related analytical work products and additional 2 more years in subject matter
Could pass ad-hoc technical and whiteboard test given various data ETL and other patterns of real-time, large data, data cleanup, etc. scenarios
Our work is traditionally unclassified, but will require certain amount of background, reference, and other checks
Travel will be local in-state only and require on-site work.
We emphasize a balance of work and life and target 40-50 hour weeks with ample times to refresh with great paid-time off.
Opening expected: Summer

We review our requirements quarterly and this could change. We like to plan ahead in finding amazing talent.

About Xentity

We provide Competitive Salary, Industry Leading Bonus Programs, and additional full suite of benefits and perks. Culturally, we focus on impacting our clients with delivering early, fast and quality with a team culture. In doing so, We emphasize a balance of work and life and target 40-50 hour weeks with ample times to refresh with great paid-time off. Check out more on our package and benefits of working at Xentity : https://www.xentity.com/careers/

We are a fast-growing data consulting and support services firm - focused on large data programs in data types such as geospatial, open, big, and IoT data. Check out www.xentity.com to learn about our focus, services, clients, missions, values as well as our excellent benefits package and career information.

We have high profile clients and projects that our staff really deliver for, as well enjoy knowing they make a large difference.

Our President has a vision to continue to focus on solutions that transform the Next Generation. Using data integration, knowledge solutions, and amazing increases in computing to impact energy, geosciences, land management, we can bring quality and simplifications to existing and new data flow! Imaging being on a team that brings advanced concepts like high performance computing, AI, data science, fuzzy logic, changing interfaces human-computer points mobile or augmented reality and many more disruptions. This truly can put the I back in IT and GIS.... by concentrating on pragmatic knowledge-first data designs, leadership and management, and the all too forgotten focus on outreach and engagement strategies and solutions.

More can be found at careers.xentity.com,Job Title: Data Base Programmer/Analyst
Location: Denver, CO-80203
Duration: 4 Months
Job Description:
Database Programmer for SEEs (Grant Management) Pipeline Implementation
The existing SEEs application is used by the Drop-out Prevention and Student Re-engagement unit to track grants.
As part of this project, the new SEEs application will be incorporated into the Online Data Pipeline System (ODS).
The Online Data Pipeline System is a standardized system, based on best practices.
It is used for data collections from the districts and schools.
This provides all the best practices for data storage, back-up and recovery, data security, etc.
This includes using tables, views and PL/SQL (stored procedures and user defined functions).
Java is used to manage web application control logic and to implement the web user interface.
Optimize processing and run time.
Explore integration of Cognos and/or Tableau BI reporting as part of the resulting new application.
Additional enhancements to the SEEs application that need attention that have not been identified at this time.
Roles & Responsibilities:
Analyze, develop, test and implement an enhanced SEEs application.
Migrating applications to the Online Data Pipeline System since its inception.
Actively performing business analysis functions to elicit business rules and requirements, as well as technical requirements from the organization(s) currently using the existing SEEs application.
Review and analyze the resulting documentation, subsequently design, develop, test, document, and implement the new application.
Incorporating the SEEs application into the data pipeline tool will also include storage of the collected data into the data warehouse.
Modernize the existing SEEs application to take advantage of the new features available in current Oracle database version, 11g R2 running on the Oracle EXADATA platform.
Required Experience:
Experience in application coding and in creating computer applications and/or databases
5+ years' experience using Oracle database
5+ years of PL/SQL development experience
5+ years Java application development
At least three (5) years of current, professional IT experience in full life cycle development of custom web applications which must include Java/J2EE development experience; Oracle SQL development experience; and a strong understanding and experience with XML.
Preferred Experience:
Oracle EXADATA.
Oracle built in DBMS packages.
3+ years of Unix scripting
Experience with Toad.
Spring Framework, and Struts 2.
JDeveloper as an Integrated Development Environment (IDE).
Experience with WebLogic application server.
Experience with Cognos BI Reporting.
Experience with Tableau Reporting.
Subversion (SVN) as a source control platform.
Web services.
Experience with UI technologies such as AJAX, JSTL, JSP, HTML, DHTML, JavaScript, and CSS.
Experience with k-12 data/systems.
Required Skills:
Ability to work independently to research and problem solve issues
Ability to work with end users to troubleshoot production issues
Ability to document solutions/processes as needed
About our Company:
22nd Century Technologies is a business enterprise that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Its journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century technologies supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions. With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Technologies is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Black Knight is the premier provider of integrated technology, services, data and analytics that lenders and servicers look to first to help successfully manage the entire loan life cycle. Our deep understanding of regulatory and compliance issues complements the knowledge, technology and solutions we offer to help our clients achieve their business goals. Black Knight offers leading software systems; data and analytics offerings; and information solutions that facilitate and automate many of the business processes across the mortgage life cycle.

JOB FAMILY DESCRIPTION

Responsible for performing in-depth data analysis and developing complex ad-hoc queries and conversion requirements to meet business needs. Deploy, troubleshoot and resolve data issues, conducting data research and ensure data quality.

GENERAL DUTIES & RESPONSIBILITIES
Identify, research and analyze data so that it can be accurately processed.
Perform analysis and document conversion requirements to translate data sets into standardized formats.
Perform data analysis functions for assigned business unit including design and development of critical ad hoc reports.
Perform structured quality assurance testing including the development of test plans and scripts.
Proactively identify data issues that need to be fixed and perform detailed data verification and analysis.
Responsible for the escalation and resolution of data issues.
Make process and/or system improvement recommendations to assist the business unit in achieving its goals and objectives.
Work across business units/teams to collect, aggregate, match, consolidate, and confirm data for quality and accuracy.
Gather reporting requirements for change requests and ad-hoc reports as requested.
May assist with acquisition, extraction, transforming and standing up of various data sets.
May design and/or develop and ensure the quality of specific databases for collection, tracking and reporting of research data.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
EDUCATIONAL GUIDELINES

A high school diploma or GED is required for this role.

GENERAL KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS & ABILITIES
Proficient written and oral communication skills in dealing with employees or external customers/clients
Proficiency in standard office software, such as MS Office, MS Access, MS Word, MS Excel, etc.
Demonstrated experience with data manipulation and analysis
Working knowledge of relational databases a plus
Strong ad-hoc SQL query development, SAS or C++ skills
Experience working with data analytics-driven solutions with sensitive data sources
High degree of creative, analytical and problem solving skills
Ability to gather and interpret information and to develop, recommend and implement solutions
Team oriented - ability to build departmental and cross-functional relationships
Data Analyst III

Advanced professional role. Highly skilled with extensive proficiency. May oversee the area in the absence of the lead/supervisor. Develops large and/or complex solutions that require analysis and research. Writes and creates complex queries independently and has a strong understanding of the supporting database schema. Works on multiple projects as a project leader or frequently as the subject matter expert. May monitor workflow. Make recommendations for process improvements as appropriate. Coaches and mentors more junior staff. Works under minimal supervision with wide latitude for independent judgment. Typically requires a minimum of six (6) or more years of demonstrated acquisition work experience with at least four (4) years as of Data Analyst II.

Black Knight is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, age, and protected veteran or military family status. Our employees' diversity is our strength, and when we embrace our differences, it makes us better and brighter. Black Knight's commitment to inclusion is at the core of who we are, and motivates us in how we do business each and every day.,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL, etc), programming (XML, JavaScript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS, etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

qQ0bLSkziv,Role: Data Security Analyst
Location: Denver, CO
Duration: 7 Months

Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users. Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 1 year or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area. Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.

Email your resume to: usjobs@mavensoft.com
To learn more about Mavensoft visit us online at http://www.mavensoft.com/,Job Description
Job description
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and “clean” data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Requirements
Proven work experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Strong analytical skills with the ability to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Master's in Computer Science or Engineering Management or Project Management or Information Systems/Technology (Preferred)
Powered by JazzHR

Rho9D9XvHH,Company Description

ClientSolv Technologies is an IT solution firm with over a decade of experience serving Fortune 1000 companies, public sector and small to medium sized companies. ClientSolv Technologies is a woman-owned and operated company that is certified as a WMBE, 8a firm by the Federal government's Small Business Administration.

Job Description

We are seeking a remote ColdFusion Developer with MSSQL Development skills to assist with building a solution for end users to access legacy data with a new application and systems that are being implemented. This role will be a 3-6 month contract and will be a telecommuting/remote role.

The current system, which was built on ColdFusion and MSSQL has over 100 reports which will need to be translated and exported to flat file such that our users can continue to pull reports outside of the system.

The duties of this role are as follows:
Assist with building a solution for end users to access legacy data with a new application and systems that are being implemented.
Understand the data model within the application
Reverse engineer the queries within the application
Standardize the set of queries and reports
Export data for all users and reports Skills
Qualifications
Senior level ColdFusion Development
Senior Level MSSQL Development
Additional Information

3- 6 months contract role. Can work remotely,Amyx is seeking to hire a Senior Contract Data Analyst located in Aurora, CO. The successful candidate must have A 4-year course of study leading to a bachelor's degree with a major in any field, that includes or is supplemented by at least 24 semester hours in any combination of the following fields: accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization. Also, a minimum of 5 years of experience serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.

Responsibilities and Skills:
Extensive knowledge of all phases of acquisition management.
Extensive knowledge of federal and DoD contracting principles (Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), DoD Directives and Instructions, laws, regulations and procedures.
Knowledge of the methods and techniques of fact-finding, analysis, and resolution of complex problems, and the ability to develop concrete action plans to solve problems.
Knowledge and Experience in the following government-wide system’s use and policy such as: FPDS, eSRS, FSRS, FBO, FAPIIS, and CPARS.
Knowledge of the DOD Procurement Data Standards (PDS)/PDS error Guide.
Good verbal, analytical and written communication skills.
Good organizational skills in tracking data and actions.
Experience in Customer Service.
Knowledge and Experience writing professional documents.
Knowledge and Experience of procurement and/or contracting.
Skilled in Business Intelligence Reporting.
Well versed in MS Word, Excel, Share Point and Power Point.
Supported Technologies:
Integrative Acquisition Environment
DOD acquisition system

Required Skills and Qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree and preferred candidates will have a major in or is supplemented by at least 24 semester hours in any combination of the following fields: accounting, business, finance, law, contracts, purchasing, economics, industrial management, marketing, quantitative methods or organization.
5 years of experience required serving as a Federal government and/or contractor employee in the GS-1102 series or equivalent capacity as a contract specialist/administrator or procurement analyst.
Desired Skills and Qualifications:
Knowledge of Federal and DOD acquisition procedures
Amyx is an Equal Opportunity employer. Amyx is committed to providing equal employment opportunity to all job seekers. Every qualified applicant receives focused consideration for employment and no one is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability or protected veteran status. In addition to federal law requirements, Amyx complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Veterans/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Amyx is an E-Verify employer.
Amyx proudly and proactively takes affirmative action to advance employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans and individuals with disabilities.
Physical Demands
Employee needs to be able to sit at a workstation for extended periods; use hand(s) to handle or feel objects, tools, or controls; reach with hands and arms; talk and hear. Most positions require ability to work on desktop or laptop computer for extended periods of time reading, reviewing/analyzing information, and providing recommendations, summaries and/or reports in written format. Must be able to effectively communicate with others verbally and in writing. Employee may be required to occasionally lift and/or move moderate amounts of weight, typically less than 20 pounds. Regular and predictable attendance is essential.