We’re looking for a Senior Data Analyst who has a love of mentorship, data visualization, and generating actionable insights from raw data. In this role, you’ll have the opportunity to be an organizational influencer, who will generate insights with a good degree of autonomy, and partner with data science to grow deeper analytical skills. You will be joining the Insights & Analytics team, a team tasked with developing insights and reporting to support our customers and advisors’ needs. This team sits within the Customer Operations team, but is also connected to the Product organization.

In this role, you will work mainly with Customer Operations stakeholders to set KPIs and evaluate the effectiveness of current strategies and workflows. You will be involved in many aspects of data operations, from data auditing to building dashboards and analytical insights. For example, you will review the code of more junior analysts and organize coding workshops. You will build metrics to evaluate the performance of our advisors, eliminating confounding variables and creating weighted measures that account for individual success. You will define metrics and create dashboards to track the success of the current strategic direction. You will analyze the text-based interactions with our advisors to improve care quality. You will also analyze interactions with our chatbot to improve the responses of the bot to match customer expectations. You will collaborate with the Data Engineering team in pursuit of better data modeling and you can collaborate with the Data Science team on more modeling-heavy pursuits, like topic modeling or search recommendations. You will be a mentor to all other members of the analytics team, which demands that you excel in a culture of teaching and learning.

You will report to the Manager of the Insights & Analytics team, Customer Operations in Squarespace’s New York offices.

RESPONSIBILITIES
Design and develop KPIs, reports, and dashboards using BI/data visualization tools that clearly track the effectiveness of current strategies
Execute and communicate impactful analyses, using SQL and R/Python to improve the customer experience and drive Customer Operations and Product roadmap
Raise the skill level of the analytics team through reviewing code, organizing training sessions, acting as a mentor, and introducing new analytical methods and tools
Help design and evaluate experiments and pilots, setting clear hypotheses and success metrics, as well as using the right statistical methods for analyses
Effectively partner with Customer Operations and Product stakeholders, as well as our Data Engineering team
QUALIFICATIONS
4 or more years of experience as a data analyst, data scientist, or in a relevant field in which you have worked with large datasets to transform data to meaningful insights
Mastery of SQL, and experience with R/Python
Experience with dashboarding/BI tools like Chartio, Looker, Tableau
Experience with data cleaning, analysis, and presentation to non-technical stakeholders
Bachelor’s degree in a quantitative or logic-driven discipline
Intellectual curiosity and a deep love of mentorship and generating actionable insights
Preferred: Advanced degree (Master’s or PhD) in quantitative field
Preferred: Experience with topic modeling, text analytics/natural language processing
We are hiring at various experience levels and we’re particularly interested in having a diverse team with a broad set of skills and viewpoints. If this seems like an opportunity you’d like to explore, but you’re not sure if you qualify, we encourage you to apply anyway!

About Squarespace

Squarespace makes beautiful products to help people with creative ideas succeed. By blending elegant design and sophisticated engineering, we empower millions of people — from individuals and local artists to entrepreneurs shaping the world’s most iconic businesses — to share their stories with the world. Squarespace’s team of more than 900 is headquartered in downtown New York City, with offices in Dublin and Portland. For more information, visit www.squarespace.com/about.

Today, more than a million people around the globe use Squarespace to share different perspectives and experiences with the world. Not only do we embrace and celebrate the diversity of our customer base, but we also strive for the same in our employees. At Squarespace, we are committed to equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, gender, gender identity or expression, or veteran status. We are proud to be an equal opportunity workplace.,About Us

At Teachers Pay Teachers (TpT), we're unlocking the power of educator-created content. More than 85% of U.S. teachers come to TpT every year to get teacher-tested, engaging, and rigorous materials. What began as a humble exchange for teachers looking to share lesson plans has since exploded into a massive online marketplace where teachers have created 4 million resources for all aspects of PreK-12 education. More than six million educators worldwide (including teachers, administrators, and parents) have downloaded TpT resources more than a billion times. According to Fast Company, in 2019, Teachers Pay Teachers is one of the top 50 Most Innovative Companies in the world! If you haven't heard of TpT yet and want to learn more, just ask a teacher.

Who we are looking for

We're a team of good people doing great things. We listen first. We love our work. And we are all teachers and learners in whatever we do. We believe that productivity is never an accident. It's the result of a commitment to excellence, intelligent planning, passionate teamwork, and focused effort. We want every day to be fun and to matter.

Role Description

As a Data Analyst, you will support the adoption of business intelligence tools across teams, foster a culture of insightful analysis and crisp reporting, and become a trusted business partner within the organization.

You know and love working with data and analytics tools and can use your technical skills, business acumen, and creativity to solve unique business problems. Reporting to the Analytics Manager, you'll work closely with business, marketing, data science, engineering, and product teams to develop a deep understanding of TpT's business and drive strategy and action through high quality, timely analysis.

Responsibilities
Analyze: surface actionable insights and opportunities from complex data; leverage quantitative and qualitative data to understand ecosystems, user behaviors, and long-term trends
Collaborate: partner with marketing, product, customer experience, and engineering to translate business issues into testable hypotheses with defined KPIs; ensure metrics used to track the business and measure results are consistent and the most relevant to inform decision-making across the organization
Communicate: report on the state of the business and make data accessible through objective data-driven stories that influence and enable stakeholders; establish shared vision across the company for data-driven practices
Enable: build dynamic and rich dashboards and reporting solutions to support company initiatives and strategic planning; educate other teams at TpT on analysis best practices and how to self-serve data needs; leverage Jira to prioritize projects and requests
Requirements
2+ years of analytics experience at a software technology company
Experience designing, leading and executing analysis
Ability to visualize data in additive ways
Comfortable with large, complex relational databases (both transactional and clickstream)
Excellent communication skills
Experience in creating, optimizing, and automating reports and dashboards
Highly organized & able to prioritize effectively
Experience working cross-functionally
Experience with SQL
Extra Credit
Experience with an online marketplace
Experience with attribution modeling
Experience with aspects of our BI tech stack: BigQuery, Looker, Heap, Optimizely
Experience with Python and/or R
Statistical skills (e.g., confidence intervals and forecasting)
Experience with ML
Extracurriculars
Parental leave for both mothers and fathers to be able to take some quality time in bonding with their new addition to their family
Comprehensive Medical & Dental Benefits
Mother's Room
Quiet Room
Company Events (Bring Your Child to Work Day, Field Day, Camp TpT, Hackathons, etc.,)
Here at TpT we value Diversity & Inclusion and encourage people to bring their most authentic selves to work. We cultivate an environment where people are recognized and celebrated for their individuality.

Any TpT applicant who requires reasonable accommodations during the interview process should contact the TpT People Ops Team (accommodations@teacherspayteachers.com) to make the need for an accommodation known.

Finally, if you're a California resident, California law requires that we provide you notice about the collection and use of your personal information. We encourage you to read it carefully. You can find our full notice here.,Note: By applying to this position your application is automatically submitted to the following locations: Mountain View, CA, USA; San Bruno, CA, USA; New York, NY, USA

Minimum qualifications:
BA/BS degree or equivalent practical experience.
3 years of experience working with statistical packages (e.g. R, SAS, Stata, MATLAB, etc.).
Experience articulating product questions, pulling data from datasets (SQL) and using statistics to arrive at an answer.
Preferred qualifications:
BA/BS or Master's degree in a quantitative field such as; Statistics, Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics, Data Sciences.
Experience in scripting with SQL, extracting large sets of data, and design of ETL flows.
Experience in an inter-disciplinary/cross-functional field.
Interest and aptitude in data, metrics, analysis and trends and applied knowledge of measurement, statistics and program evaluation.
Ability to translate analysis results into business recommendations, and excellent written and verbal communication skills.
Distinctive problem solving skills and impeccable business judgment.
About the job


Product Analysts provide quantitative analysis, market expertise and a strategic perspective to our partners throughout the organization. As a data-loving member of the team, you'll serve as an analytics expert for your partners, using numbers to help them make better decisions. You will weave stories with meaningful insight from data. You'll make key recommendations for your fellow Googlers in Engineering and Product Management.

As a Product Analyst, you relish tallying up the numbers one minute and communicating your findings to a team leader the next. You can see different angles of a product or business opportunity, and you know how to connect the dots and interact with people in various roles and functions. You will work to effectively turn business questions into data analysis, and provide meaningful recommendations on strategy.
Responsibilities
Conduct data analysis to make business recommendations (e.g. cost-benefit, invest-divest, forecasting, impact analysis).
Deliver effective presentations of findings and recommendations to multiple levels of stakeholders, creating visual displays of quantitative information.
Develop and automate reports, iteratively build and prototype dashboards to provide insights at scale, solving for business priorities.
Collaborate with cross-functional stakeholders to formulate and complete full cycle analysis that includes data gathering, analysis, ongoing scaled deliverables and presentations.
Help Google to focus on key decisions to improve products and services.

Google is proud to be an equal opportunity workplace and is an affirmative action employer. We are committed to equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, gender identity or Veteran status. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. See also Google's EEO Policy and EEO is the Law. If you have a disability or special need that requires accommodation, please let us know by completing this form.,We are building Duolingo's newly formed FP&A / Strategic Finance team as our revenue grows rapidly. We are looking for a data & business intelligence analyst who is hungry to help set up the foundational data elements of the finance team. You will serve as the bridge between the finance and data science teams and serve as the enabler of the strategic finance analyses. The successful candidate for this position has prior experience in data intensive roles and understands fundamental drivers of a business. This role will initially report to the Head of FP&A / Strategic Finance and will play an instrumental role in building the financial future of the company.

Duolingo is the most popular language learning application in the world, with over 300 million users and hundreds of billions of data points. We are passionate about educating our users, making fact-based decisions, and finding elegant solutions to complex problems. While we take our mission to heart, we don't take ourselves too seriously; we are creative, and we have fun at work everyday. If this sounds like you, then come help us build the next-generation learning company!

Responsibilities
Build intuitive and readable dashboards using visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Plotly, Data Studio) and extract actionable insights
Partner with our data science team to develop data pipelines, scalable reporting packages, and assist with statistical methods to drive business results
Act as a thought partner in the selection of the company's key performance indicators (KPI), craft its definitions, and track the progress against those target metrics
Dissect multiple sources of data in a format applicable for strategic financial analyses
Perform data quality assessments and make recommendations for improvements
Influence bottoms-up data model design and develop your own data solutions as needed
Bridge analytics and finance, speaking both languages
Requirements
Minimum of a Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Statistics, Mathematics, Engineering, Economics or related field
2-5 years of experience in a data visualization, data scientist, or data analyst role
Expertise using SQL to extract, clean, and transform data in large, complex, nested, databases
Proficiency with data visualization tools such as Tableau or Data Studio for full-stack data analysis, insight synthesis and presentation
Strong ability to condense complex concepts and analysis into clear and concise takeaways that drive action.
Excellent written and verbal communication skills with meticulous attention to detail.
Demonstrated strong intellectual curiosity
Able to relocate to or work in our New York City office
Bonus Points
Experience with digital subscription and in-app purchase mobile businesses with millions of users
Experience at a high growth company that has undertaken an IPO
Expertise using Python or R to perform statistical analysis and modeling
An impressive Duolingo XP or streak!,Vettery is changing the way people hire and get hired. We use machine learning and real-time data to match talented job-seekers with inspiring companies. Our goal is to enrich and automate the recruiting process, make hiring more rewarding for everyone, and create a happier and more accountable working world.Since launching in 2015, we've made thousands of matches on our marketplace. We're currently working with over 80,000 job-seekers and 20,000 companies, from Fortune 500 giants to startups based out of co-working spaces. We've built powerful machine learning capabilities, and our matching algorithm is becoming more intelligent with each passing day. With an eye on the future, we're expanding our reach across major cities in the US, and around the globe.As Vettery undergoes growth and changes, our Analytics team delivers the data and insights needed across all departments for a data-driven approach to scalability. As a Data Analyst at Vettery, you will work directly with our Director of Analytics to get the right data to the right people, and figure out what 'right' is.Key responsibilities and expectations:* Collaborate with key stakeholders across the company to understand their needs and how we can leverage data to improve their processes* Create reports and dashboards that will give insight into areas previously unexplored, including Product Analytics, Finance Metrics, Marketing Attribution, and more* Support the Director of Analytics in developing data-driven strategic proposals that have far-reaching impacts on the company's growth* Learn! Quickly learn new skills, technologies, and business context. There's nothing you can't do there's only what you can't do yetCandidate Qualifications:* 0-1+ years of experience in analytics (or related field)* Willingness to be hands-on with data and a capacity to build processes* Strong communication skills and a desire to collaborate with others* A passion for improving the recruiting experience* A growth mindset, willingness to learn as you go, and a strong tendency to Google stuff you don't already know!* Experience with Microsoft Excel, including data manipulation, charting, and advanced functions* Experience with SQL and relational database management* Experience working with data visualization is a plus* Knowledge of data analytics environments (python, R) is a plusWith the above said, we understand that no candidate is perfectly qualified for any job and believe that diversity of background and thought makes for better problem solving and creative thinking, which is why we're dedicated to adding new perspectives to the team. Even more important than your resume is a positive attitude, passion for the work, personal drive for growth, and the ability to thrive in a fluid and collaborative environment. We want you to learn new things in this role, and we encourage you to apply even if your experience doesn't align perfectly to what is listed here.Vettery has five key values that are the foundation of our company culture, which every employee embodies:* Positivity - We're positive when things get difficult so we can stay motivated and lift each other up. We're very team focused in everything we do so contagious positive energy is extremely impactful.* Ownership - We take pride in our work and take on a lot of responsibility from day one. All of us have the ability to see how our work and performance impact the success of the business.* Grit - We love getting in the trenches and building from the ground up. Even though we've significantly grown since our tiny startup days, we still have that scrappy mentality and love that there's still a lot to accomplish.* Awareness - We're focused, strategic, and constantly learning from our experiences. Each of us knows what's expected of us as a corporate citizen and within our teams.* Collaboration - We learn from one another and are constantly working with each other, within and across teams. Every team has an impact on others and we take pride in clear lines of communication.Why you'll love working at Vettery:We love coming to work on Monday. It's easy to love the work you do when you see the positive impact it has, and helping someone find their dream job can change their life forever. We believe in our mission, love the work, and have fun doing it together. Plus, coming to work in our sunny Flatiron office is easy when there are so many things to look forward to: Flag Football games, Thursday Game Night, Cross-Team lunches, company happy hours, volunteer events, adorable pups, ping-pong, and your favorite snacks.We know life is about more than just work. We have an open vacation policy so you can take the time you need to relax and rejuvenate, contribute to the cost of insurance coverage (health, vision, and dental), and offer a fully paid 12-week parental leave, 401k, commuter benefits, and gym membership discounts.We invest in your development. A company is only as strong as its team, and we want to help strengthen every member of our team. We give everyone the opportunities and support they need to reach that next professional level through company-sponsored General Assembly classes and conferences, in-house training, a culture of continuous feedback, and the chance to run with projects.We're consistently recognized for our culture. We're listed #5 on Fortune's 60 Best Companies to Work for in New York City, included in Fortune's Best Workplaces in Technology for 2020, and have been previously honored at Crain's Best Places to Work Awards and included in Inc Best Workplaces.Equal Opportunity Employer/Veterans/DisabledVettery values the multitude of talents and perspectives that a diverse workforce brings. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, national origin, religion, age, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, or protected veteran status.,Who we are
Criteo (NASDAQ: CRTO) is the global technology company powering the worlds marketers with trusted and impactful advertising. 2,800 Criteo team members partner with over 20,000 customers and thousands of publishers around the globe to deliver effective advertising across all channels, by applying advanced machine learning to unparalleled data sets. Criteo empowers companies of all sizes with the technology they need to better know and serve their customers.

As a member of the Brand Analytics team, a part of the rapidly expanding Criteo Retail Media Platform, you will utilize our MASSIVE set of shopper data to provide actionable insights and recommendations for some of the largest consumer brands in the US. With a network that includes many of the largest US retailers (Walmart, Best Buy, Target, Macy's...) we leverage our unique position to provide our brand advertisers with visibility into shopper behavior, market trends, and product performance that can't be found anywhere else. The scope of this role involves technically rigorous work, including the use of leading-edge data analysis technologies and daily interaction with other cross-functional business units and external clients.
Criteos high-growth business model brings both opportunities and challenges. This position requires working with large sets of data to solve complex business problems by thinking strategically and proposing innovative solutions. The ideal candidate functions with minimal oversight and has the ability to learn new concepts quickly.
What you'll do
Be a part of the Brand Analytics team under Criteo Retail Media
Build tools and reports using Python, query languages (Hive/Presto/Vertica/SQL), Tableau, and other technologies to satisfy the needs of internal and external clients
Focus on creating scalable solutions that give autonomy to the end-user and minimize ad hoc work
Serve a central role with a global scope that bridges the gap between Sales & Operations and Research & Development
Identify high-value business, insight, and reporting needs then prioritize, scope, and build solutions
Who you are
Bachelors degree or higher in a quantitative field (Data Science, Engineering/Computer Science, Economics, Mathematics, Statistics, Finance, etc.)
1+ year work experience with a SQL-like query language, Python, and/or R
Clear communicator who can explain and understand complex problems while dealing with both non-technical and highly-technical teams
Ability to structure and solve difficult problems with minimal supervision
Intellectual curiosity coupled with exceptional attention to detail
Why you'll love us
At Criteo, life is full of contagious energy, hard work, passion and the occasional scooter race.
Everything at Criteo is driven by the hunger to succeed and fueled by a little bit of madness.
Criteo has many perks: full covered health care & life insurance, gym allowance, and a well-stocked kitchen!
Every office is filled with equal measures of hard work and playfulness. From yoga to rooftop parties, early morning kale smoothies to late night karaoke sessions we do it all, together!

At Criteo, we dare to be different. We believe that diversity fuels innovation and creates an energy that can be seen and felt all over Criteo. We champion different perspectives and are committed to creating a workplace where all Criteos are heard and feel a sense of belonging.

Criteo collects your personal data for the purposes of managing Criteo's recruitment related activities. Consequently, Criteo may use your personal data in relation to the evaluation and selection of applicants. Your information will be accessible to the different Criteo entities across the world. By clicking the "Apply" button you expressly give your consent.,Los Angeles, CA | New York, NY

Email careers@edo.com for more information about EDO and the application process.

Who We Are

EDO is a data science software firm that develops analytics tools to make data accessible and actionable for the media and entertainment industry. Currently focused on film and TV, we work with many major movie studios and TV networks to help them forecast, market and distribute their content more effectively. Building from this strong base, we are growing into adjacent verticals.

We are a team of world-class engineers and data scientists backed by top leaders in entertainment and technology. Our co-founders and executive leadership have a strong track record with other successful ventures.

What You Will Do

In addition to standard client engagement responsibilities, you'll get to
Perform advanced statistical analyses for our clients, who will use the insights and opinions you generate to make key decisions
Understand our clients’ needs and figure out how to present our data in compelling ways that match those needs
Create client deliverables that showcase our products and present our data
Work closely with our engineers and data scientists to plan and prioritize new features
Understand industry dynamics and the competitive landscape
Help our executive leadership with strategic planning, investor pitches, strategic partnership development, and corporate finance activities

What We Are Looking For

At least 1-2 years of professional experience in a role involving on quantitative analysis
Comfort with advanced statistical analysis and ability to translate into layman’s terms
Experience in SQL and with a programming language commonly used for statistical analysis such as R or Python
Ability to write well and create slide decks and reports that present our information in a succinct and efficient manner
Strong presence in meetings with senior executives
Passion for movies, TV and advertising
The ability and willingness to wear multiple hats and switch gears frequently

Benefits

Early-stage equity and competitive salary
Medical, dental, & vision insurance
Meals and snacks during work
Movie tickets + concessions, fitness discounts, and Apple hardware,About Data Analytics at Vericred:

Vericred has built the largest, most granular, and most accurate data set covering Health Insurance and Employee Benefits plans, rates, provider networks and formularies in existence. Our data is used by millions of consumers and brokers to find plans, providers and drugs that balance cost and quality. Researchers and government agencies use our data to understand market dynamics and even drive policy decisions.

Our Data Analytics team works with internal and external constituents to develop insights from, and about, our data and interactions with our platform. We partner with leadership and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to research and develop content for thought leadership pieces. We build actionable reports and dashboards to help our operations team understand the timeliness, completeness and accuracy of our data. We research extensions to the breadth and depth of the data that we capture and validate our approaches to ingesting and synthesizing that data.

This role will be based in our New York City (Flatiron) office.

In this role you will:
Research and validate new data sources to improve, and expand, upon our data solutions
Maintain our canonical source mappings for Network and Formulary data
Uncover meaningful insights about our data - driving product development direction
Build and maintain user-facing dashboards to monitor data quality
Build and test data verification models
Partner with Engineering on validating, maintaining and extending our data ingestion platform
We would love to hear from you if you have:
A bachelors or greater in CS, Statistics, Economics or equivalent work experience
2+ years of experience with data visualization tools and technology (Tableau, Looker, D3.js)
2+ years of experience with data pipelines, ETL processes and Big Data tools (Hive, Pig, Redshift or equivalent)
3+ years of experience with SQL
Extra points for experience with common data analytics languages like R, SAS, or Python
About Vericred

Founded in 2014, Vericred is a data services company simplifying the exchange of health insurance and employee benefits data. What Plaid has done for financial services and Sabre for travel and hospitality, we are doing for health insurance by building digital infrastructure to enable the digital transformation of this $1Trillion industry.

Who We Are

At Vericred, we are data people: process driven, organized, and obsessed with the details. We value collaboration and make sure we have plenty of opportunities to spend time together outside of the office through fitness events, movie nights, happy hours, and more. We love our work and recognize the importance of balancing interests, relationships, and time outside of it. We are avid learners and prioritize personal and professional growth alongside company growth at the individual and the team level.

Our benefits include
Competitive Salary
Equity Participation
100% company paid medical and dental for you and your dependents
Healthcare and dependent FSA
401K with matching
Twice weekly catered lunches
Unlimited snacks and drinks in-office
Responsible PTO policy
Pre-tax commuting benefits
fRYEday: Our end of week Rye tasting and happy hour ritual
Stand-up desks
Centrally located office on Madison Square Park
We are an equal opportunity employer. We welcome people of different backgrounds, experiences, abilities and perspectives. Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or protected veteran status.

Powered by JazzHR,Business/Team Introduction
The Buying team is part of Amazons Supply Chain Optimization Technology / Inventory Planning and Control organization, and is responsible for deciding how much inventory to carry of every single item offered by Amazon Retail on all of Amazons websites worldwide. Consuming inputs including demand forecasts, placement options, and vendor capability data, our buying system automatically computes the optimal inventory levels and re-order quantities for every single item in our Retail catalog every single day. As a Business Intelligence Engineer/Data Analyst in Buying, you will operate at the apex of multiple Amazon systems, getting global visibility of how Amazon functions and serves our customers. Your curious mind will enable the creation of solutions that drive automation, scalability and optimization of every aspect of buying, reducing cost and delivering speed of execution to thrill our customers. The impact of your work will be global, material and remarkable.



Business Intelligence Engineer/Data Analyst Responsibilities
As a successful Business Intelligence Engineer/ Data Analyst in Buying, you need to be curious about Amazons supply chain operations and how data consumed and produced by our systems can be used to improve outcomes and lower costs. Your responsibility is to develop metrics, expose and measure the current performance of our Buying system, find and quantify opportunities for improvement, and dive deep into existing data to root cause unexpected performance. You will collaborate with engineering, research, data science and business teams for future innovation. You need to be a sophisticated user of data querying tools, and an expert at synthesizing and communicating insights and recommendations to audiences of varying levels of technical sophistication.


Major responsibilities include:


Translate / Interpret:
· Translate business questions and concerns into specific quantitative questions that can be answered with available data using sound methodologies. In cases where questions cannot be answered with available data, work with engineers to produce the required data.
Measure / Quantify / Expand

· Retrieve, synthesize, and present critical data in a format that is immediately useful to answering specific questions or improving system performance.
· Explore/analyze data and work with Research Scientists, Data Scientists and Product Managers to understand customer behaviors, spot system defects, and benchmark our ability to serve our customers
· Partner with Data Engineers and Software Engineers to design products and systems to transform and store billions of data items using AWS redshift.

Explore / Enlighten

· Given anecdotes about anomalies, design strategies to quantify the overall impact of such anomalies, deep dive to explain why they happen, and identify fixes.

Make Decisions or Recommendations

· Conduct written and verbal presentations to share insights and recommendations to audiences of varying levels of technical sophistication.



Basic Qualifications

· Bachelors degree in Statistics, Economics, Math, Finance, Engineering, Computer Science or a related quantitative field.
· At least 3 years of experience with data querying languages (e.g. SQL, Redshift).
· At least 3 years of experience articulating business questions and using quantitative techniques and driving insights for business.
· Experience with automated self-service reporting tools (e.g. Tableau).
· Confidence in dealing with technical and non-technical senior level staff.
· Ability to operate successfully and independently in a fast-paced environment.
· Comfort with ambiguity and eagerness to learn new skills.



Preferred Qualifications

· Masters degree in Statistics, Applied Mathematics, Operations Research, Economics or a related quantitative field.
· 5+ years experience with 2+ years Analytics and Process Improvement-related initiatives
· Demonstrable track record of dealing well with ambiguity, prioritizing needs, and delivering results in a dynamic environment
· Excellent verbal and written communication skills
· Experience processing, filtering, and presenting large quantities (Millions to Billions of rows) of data
· Experience working in R/Python
· Experience in supply chain is a plus,Job Description
About Data Analytics at Vericred:

Vericred has built the broadest, most granular and accurate data set covering health insurance and employee benefits plans, rates, provider-networks and formularies in the industry. Our data is used by millions of consumers, employers and brokers to find health plans, doctors and drugs . Researchers and government agencies use our data to understand market dynamics and even to drive policy decisions.

Our Data Analytics team works with internal and external constituents to develop insights from, and about, our data and interactions with our platform. We partner with leadership and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to research and develop content for thought leadership pieces. We build actionable reports and dashboards to help our operations team understand the timeliness, completeness and accuracy of our data. We research extensions to the breadth and depth of the data that we capture and validate our approaches to ingesting and synthesizing that data.

This role will be based in our New York City (Flatiron) office.

In this role you will:
Be a consumer of our own data
Collaborate with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in support of their policy research, and thought leadership papers and articles (which have appeared in the New York Times and other national publications)
Develop market analyses for use in Vericred’s own thought leadership and marketing
Uncover meaningful insights about our data - influencing product development direction
Prototype analytics solutions for our external partners
Build and maintain user-facing dashboards to monitor data quality
Build and test data validation and verification models
Partner with Engineering on validating, maintaining and extending our data ingestion platform
We would love to hear from you if you have:
Intellectual curiosity …. especially about health insurance costs and coverage
Strong writing capability
A bachelors or greater in CS, Statistics, Economics or equivalent work experience
2+ years of experience with Stata, R, SAS, Python or other common data analytics programming languages
3+ years of experience with data visualization tools and technology (Tableau, Looker, D3.js)
3+ years of experience with SQL
About Vericred

Founded in 2014, Vericred is a data services company simplifying the exchange of health insurance and employee benefits data. What Plaid has done for financial services and Sabre for travel and hospitality, we are doing for health insurance by building digital infrastructure to enable the digital transformation of this $1Trillion industry.

Who We Are

At Vericred, we are data people: process driven, organized, and obsessed with the details. We value collaboration and make sure we have plenty of opportunities to spend time together outside of the office through fitness events, movie nights, happy hours, and more. We love our work and recognize the importance of balancing interests, relationships, and time outside of it. We are avid learners and prioritize personal and professional growth alongside company growth at the individual and the team level.

Our benefits include
Competitive Salary
Equity Participation
100% company paid medical and dental for you and your dependents
Healthcare and dependent FSA
401K with matching
Twice weekly catered lunches
Unlimited snacks and drinks in-office
Responsible PTO policy
Pre-tax commuting benefits
fRYEday: Our end of week Rye tasting and happy hour ritual
Stand-up desks
Centrally located office on Madison Square Park
We are an equal opportunity employer. We welcome people of different backgrounds, experiences, abilities and perspectives. Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or protected veteran status.

Powered by JazzHR

P59ZmGevAs,About Narrativ

Narrativ is the marketplace for unbiased product recommendations by experts on the open web. We exponentially increase match rate and augment commerce content with real time conversion dataturning honest recommendations from expert voices into a brand safe, multi-billion dollar acquisition channel.

Demand for expert recommendations has exploded, surpassing the need for simple price comparison and ushering in the era of the Intentional Shopper. This is a lean in, high intent shopper who seeks the whole story to find the products best suited to her individual needs.

Our product graph100M+ products mapped to all of the rich stories about them and over $26B of live purchase data powers our high match rate. Our market research tools help editors author better, higher converting product recommendations.

Why we're special:
Ambitious technology: Our technology mines and organizes the world's product data in a way that's useful (rather than intrusive) for consumers. We built a product graph featuring 80mm SKUs enriched with $20bn of monthly cart data, making it the largest database of products matched to product recommendation.
Talented team: Fast Company recently named Narrativ one of the 50 best workplaces for innovators, fashion disruptor by Financial Times, and a technology pioneer by the World Economic Forum. We're here to pursue greatness, embrace challenge and relentlessly improve every day.
Fast growth: Narrativ drove $50mm in revenue for partners like Sephora, Nordstrom, Ulta Beauty, Chanel, Goop, Revolve, and more.
Join us for the opportunity to impact billions of shoppers on our mission to improve the value of every recommendation -- to create a better Internet for shoppers.

The Job:

Narrativ is looking for an experienced data analyst who is skilled at extracting business insights at web-scale. In this role, you will become master of the company's data model and a champion for accurate reporting. You will wrangle billions of rows of data into dashboards that guide strategic business decisions. You will make it a joy for businesspeople and engineers alike to see how revenue is affected by various technical systems, creating transparency and accountability that drives ever-improving algorithms. Your expertise and creativity will result in many people being pleasantly surprised to learn a new thing about the business, backed by hard facts.

You are Narrativ's Data Analyst

Core Responsibilities:
Establishing best practices for sharing key metrics across the business
Answering business intelligence questions
Establish testing infrastructure
Develop and execute test plans, mentor others in how to execute a test plan
Effectively communicate and escalate discovered issues to Engineers and Product Managers
Prioritize and advocate for issues in the backlog
Contribute to a culture of quality in every part of the product development process
Actively participate in improving QA processes, procedures, and implementing best practices
Requirements:


Expert level SQL skills
Experience with BI/ data visualization tools (dashboards and reports)
Intellectual Curiosity
Ability to manage business and technical stakeholders effectively
Desire to 'get under the hood' when it comes to Narrativ's data and tools
Experience with data analysis in Python or R
Data Engineering experience is a plus as is experience with DBA's, predictive analysis and GIS/mapping
Important Notice: We are putting the health and safety of our employees first. For the balance of 2020, we'll be working from home. WIth so much uncertainty in the world, this is a decision that helped eliminate the anxiety associated with commuting and gave our teammates one less thing to worry about.

Narrativ is proud to be an equal opportunity workplace and is an affirmative action employer. We are committed to equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, or veteran status.,Job ID
762918BR

Location

New York, New York, United States

Business
Disney Streaming Services

Date posted
Jul. 09, 2020
Job Summary:
Comprised of Disney’s international media businesses and the Company’s various streaming services, the Direct-to-Consumer and International (DTCI) segment aligns technology, content and distribution platforms to expand the Company’s global footprint and deliver world-class, personalized entertainment experiences to consumers around the world.

The Walt Disney Company’s Direct-to-Consumer and International segment (DTCI) is a global, multiplatform media, technology and distribution organization for high-quality content created by Disney’s Studio Entertainment and Media Networks groups.

DTCI includes Disney’s international media operations and the Company’s direct-to-consumer businesses globally, including the upcoming Disney-branded direct-to-consumer streaming service, the Company’s ownership stake in Hulu, and the ESPN+ sports streaming service, programmed in partnership with ESPN. BAMTECH Media, developer of the ESPN+ and Disney-branded streaming platforms, oversees all consumer-facing digital technology and products across the Company as part of the Direct-to-Consumer and International segment.

Regional teams in Disney Streaming partner with local content, marketing, business, and data partners to inform decision-making at scale. As Principal Data Analyst for DSS LATAM Analytics, you will be the direct partner to the regional LATAM Disney+ team, working hand-in-hand to: ensure widespread communication of insights, reports, and tools; highlight best practices; identify and anticipate opportunities for data-driven decision-making; and lead project teams to achieve critical objectives by driving close collaboration between organizations.

Responsibilities:

Partnership: Be the connection between the Disney Streaming data teams and the LATAM data team, influencing and coordinating between teams to facilitate communication and consistently deliver high quality results.
Project Management: Plan, track, and socialize complex cross-functional projects across teams (technical and non-technical) and leaders within DSS and LATAM.
Reporting & Automation at Scale: Partner closely with DSS data teams & the LATAM D+ Data team to understand existing reporting capability and modify/build as needed to address self-service and push-reporting needs at scale.
Ideate & Innovate: Identify, anticipate, and execute on opportunities to deliver impact by knowing the right approach: adapting existing tools and algorithms in novel ways, or building capability from scratch. Keep abreast of emerging technologies and ensure that analytical approaches are designed to incorporate new platforms and trends.
Hands-on Analysis: Conduct complex targeted ad hoc descriptive and statistical analysis to inform regional decision-making to address critical and strategic issues.
Leadership: Mentor junior and senior members of the team to improve their skills and knowledge. Serve as the subject matter expert in relevant technical areas.
Basic Qualifications:

Fluency in English and Spanish is required.
6+ years of analytical experience, including expert hands-on experience with SQL, project and technical leadership.
Expertise with Python/R or other statistical programming language a plus
Expertise in data exploration and data visualization tools like Tableau or Looker
Excellence in communicating technical results to non-technical audiences. Experience in presenting to executive audiences is strongly preferred.
Ability to think strategically, and analyze and interpret market and consumer information
Strong interpersonal and relationship management skills particularly with technical or engineering functions
Excellent judgement in selecting methods and/or techniques to resolve issues and challenges.
Preferred Qualifications:

Experience with streaming services is a plus!
Preferred Education
Advanced degree (PhD or MS) in an analytical field or equivalent experience preferred.
About Disney Streaming Services:


Disney Streaming Services is responsible for developing and operating The Walt Disney Company’s direct-to-consumer video businesses globally, including the ESPN+ premium sports streaming service; Disney+, the dedicated streaming home for entertainment from Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars, National Geographic and BAMTECH Media, a global leader in direct-to-consumer video streaming products and solutions. Our core mission is to deliver global audiences the freedom to access content on their terms across any connected device, time or location. We serve consumers by bringing the world’s most beloved characters, timeless stories, legendary athletes, and epic sporting events to global audiences through best-in-class direct-to-consumer video services. We strive daily to imaginatively challenge convention with innovative technology that gives consumers the freedom to access content on their terms across any connected device, time or location.

About The Walt Disney Company:


The Walt Disney Company, together with its subsidiaries and affiliates, is a leading diversified international family entertainment and media enterprise with the following business segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio entertainment, consumer products and interactive media. From humble beginnings as a cartoon studio in the 1920s to its preeminent name in the entertainment industry today, Disney proudly continues its legacy of creating world-class stories and experiences for every member of the family. Disney’s stories, characters and experiences reach consumers and guests from every corner of the globe. With operations in more than 40 countries, our employees and cast members work together to create entertainment experiences that are both universally and locally cherished.
This position is with Disney Streaming Services LLC, which is part of a business segment we call Disney Streaming Services.

Disney Streaming Services LLC is an equal opportunity employer. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or protected veteran status. Disney fosters a business culture where ideas and decisions from all people help us grow, innovate, create the best stories and be relevant in a rapidly changing world.,Job ID
762540BR

Location

New York, New York, United States

Business
Disney Streaming Services

Date posted
Jun. 22, 2020
Job Summary:
Comprised of Disney’s international media businesses and the Company’s various streaming services, the Direct-to-Consumer and International (DTCI) segment aligns technology, content and distribution platforms to expand the Company’s global footprint and deliver world-class, personalized entertainment experiences to consumers around the world.

The Walt Disney Company’s Direct-to-Consumer and International segment (DTCI) is a global, multiplatform media, technology and distribution organization for high-quality content created by Disney’s Studio Entertainment and Media Networks groups.

DTCI includes Disney’s international media operations and the Company’s direct-to-consumer businesses globally, including the upcoming Disney-branded direct-to-consumer streaming service, the Company’s ownership stake in Hulu, and the ESPN+ sports streaming service, programmed in partnership with ESPN. BAMTECH Media, developer of the ESPN+ and Disney-branded streaming platforms, oversees all consumer-facing digital technology and products across the Company as part of the Direct-to-Consumer and International segment.

We are looking for an experienced Senior Analyst to join our Data Instrumentation & Quality team. This role requires acute attention to detail, a strong sense of accountability, collaboration skills, and extensive hands-on experience with data quality processes and specification writing. This role will be tasked with creating high quality datasets by writing detailed tracking specifications and performing ongoing data quality testing for our clickstream tracking solution, working directly with product and our front-end development teams for consumer facing product features.

At DSS, data is central to measuring all aspects of the business, and critical to its operations and growth. As a part of Data Governance, Data Instrumentation & Quality works closely with data stakeholders, front-end technology teams, data engineering, and back-end services for consistent collection and usage of business critical KPIs and data points.
Responsibilities:

Create high quality data instrumentation requirements via actionable JIRA specifications for critical business use cases
Perform cross system data validation and investigations to discover data inconsistencies, raising bug tickets outlining path to remediation for development teams
Serve as a point of contact for front-end engineering teams for any questions or issues resulting with specifications, requirements or bugs
Perform data quality testing and assurance as a part of the front-end engineering’s continuous delivery and deployment lifecycle via device testing and automation
Serve as a SME on product interface and capabilities for select front-end devices
Perform data quality audits, identify data instrumentation issues, suggest improvements and help implement fixes
Provide support to escalate and triage data quality issues across the data and engineering organizations, outlining path to remediation and raising required engineering work
Understand business requirements, translating them into actionable JIRA specifications including how data should be tracked, tested and measured for analysis, reporting and data quality assurance
Basic Qualifications:

Strong experience in documenting requirements from a product and data perspective for engineering consumption
Data quality automation and testing experience as a part of a continuous delivery and deployment engineering process
High familiarity with JIRA oriented product ticketing practices, agile engineering principles and theory for backlog and project management
Exceptional interpersonal skills and written communication skills
Excellent written and verbal communication skills. Able to communicate anywhere from the team level to C-level executives.
Knowledge of services oriented architecture and development practices, including implementation of analytics and clickstream tracking
2+ years of either Python, Pyspark or SQL
Preferred Qualifications:

Minimum 3 years of experience in the technology industry, knowledge of clickstream datasets a plus.
High familiarity with data platforms and applications such as Databricks, Jupyter, Snowflake, Redshift, Airflow
Familiarity with client oriented development in languages such as Swift or Objective C
Experience working across marketing platforms such as Kochava, Adobe Analytics, Adobe Tag Manager, Flashtalking, Google Ads, Campaign Manager, DV360, Bing Ads, Facebook, Datorama, Segment, Alooma, BlueKai and Salesforce Marketing Cloud
Preferred Education
BA or BS in a quantitative field (Business, Math/Statistics, Economics, CS, Engineering, or similar) is desired
About Disney Streaming Services:


Disney Streaming Services is responsible for developing and operating The Walt Disney Company’s direct-to-consumer video businesses globally, including the ESPN+ premium sports streaming service; Disney+, the dedicated streaming home for entertainment from Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars, National Geographic and BAMTECH Media, a global leader in direct-to-consumer video streaming products and solutions. Our core mission is to deliver global audiences the freedom to access content on their terms across any connected device, time or location. We serve consumers by bringing the world’s most beloved characters, timeless stories, legendary athletes, and epic sporting events to global audiences through best-in-class direct-to-consumer video services. We strive daily to imaginatively challenge convention with innovative technology that gives consumers the freedom to access content on their terms across any connected device, time or location.

About The Walt Disney Company:


The Walt Disney Company, together with its subsidiaries and affiliates, is a leading diversified international family entertainment and media enterprise with the following business segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio entertainment, consumer products and interactive media. From humble beginnings as a cartoon studio in the 1920s to its preeminent name in the entertainment industry today, Disney proudly continues its legacy of creating world-class stories and experiences for every member of the family. Disney’s stories, characters and experiences reach consumers and guests from every corner of the globe. With operations in more than 40 countries, our employees and cast members work together to create entertainment experiences that are both universally and locally cherished.
This position is with Disney Streaming Services LLC, which is part of a business segment we call Disney Streaming Services.

Disney Streaming Services LLC is an equal opportunity employer. Applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability or protected veteran status. Disney fosters a business culture where ideas and decisions from all people help us grow, innovate, create the best stories and be relevant in a rapidly changing world.,Who we are
Criteo (NASDAQ: CRTO) is the global technology company powering the worlds marketers with trusted and impactful advertising. 2,800 Criteo team members partner with over 20,000 customers and thousands of publishers around the globe to deliver effective advertising across all channels, by applying advanced machine learning to unparalleled data sets. Criteo empowers companies of all sizes with the technology they need to better know and serve their customers.

A Sr. Data Analyst on the Brand Analytics team is a key player in understanding every aspect of Criteos complex business. This role interfaces across the organization to answer challenging analytical questions related to the performance of Criteo products for Brands. The scope involves both technically rigorous work, including the use of leading-edge data analysis technologies, and daily interaction with other cross-functional business units as well as external clients.
What will you be doing?

As a member of Brand Analytics, you will be joining a team that is growing and in spotlight with focus to turn rich data into actionable insights. We are looking for experienced individual who enjoys collaborating with various Executives, Account Strategy, Sales or Marketing and help them make data driven decisions.
Whether you are delivering clear and actionable insights to advertisers or retailers, analyzing customer behavior and trends, setting up testing or data mining you will be working with sharp individuals leveraging cutting edge technology and mining multi-terabyte datasets. You have proven track record of strength in quantitative analysis, committed to rapidly advancing in your career and strong interest in learning and shaping the e-commerce retail.
Who you are
Bachelors degree or higher in a quantitative field (Data Science, Engineering/Computer Science, Economics, Mathematics, Statistics, Finance, etc.)
3+ year work experience with a SQL-like query language, Python, and/or R
Clear communicator who can explain and understand complex problems while dealing with both non-technical and highly-technical teams
Ability to structure and solve difficult problems with minimal supervision
Intellectual curiosity coupled with exceptional attention to detail

At Criteo, we dare to be different. We believe that diversity fuels innovation and creates an energy that can be seen and felt all over Criteo. We champion different perspectives and are committed to creating a workplace where all Criteos are heard and feel a sense of belonging.

Criteo collects your personal data for the purposes of managing Criteo's recruitment related activities. Consequently, Criteo may use your personal data in relation to the evaluation and selection of applicants. Your information will be accessible to the different Criteo entities across the world. By clicking the "Apply" button you expressly give your consent.,We're looking for a Senior Data Analyst to join our team in Salt Lake City and become an integral part of our content team.The role of the Data Analyst is to be the custodians of client data working closely with internal and external customers to understand their information needs on both tactical and strategic projects. We are the first point of contact for the customer day to day, working closely with the data & harvesting teams to resolve issues for the customer and to ensure excellent customer experience on every interaction. We are responsible for ensuring the data integrity and accuracy and ensuring the client garners the most value from our data.Key Responsibilities* Quality assurance of data harvested from online stores* Cataloguing harvested data* Data transformation and quality checks* Help coordinate and define requirements for data provisioning* Development and maintenance of integrity tests* Use attention to detail to spot errors in the data and take appropriate measures to fix them* Ability to meet daily targets with an unwavering degree of accuracy* Providing reports on customer data and problem solving* Direct interaction with functions of the business (Sales, Product Management, Engineering) and with our customers regarding queries and change requests* Ownership of data quality and parity across data collected online, in stores and sensitive data provided by the client* Tracking of completion and accuracy across data sources, and ownership of these metrics against a master catalogueYour Experience* Dedication to QUALITY, attention to detail, persistence and ability to follow through* Intellectual curiosity with a proven ability to connect disparate data points* Passion, a strong desire to achieve and exceed goals* Excellent problem solving and data analytics skills* Excellent verbal and written communication skills* Self-starter, having the ability to manage own work with a strong attention to detail* Ability to learn required skills quickly* Ability to work independently as needed* Ability to work cross-functionally* Experience with database tools a plus* Logical thinker with some experience of business intelligence and/or structured decision-making* Proven Excel and data analytics experience, identifying key insights and recommendations; examples of prior work will be requested* Undergraduate degree preferable, but not essential* Knowledge of Excel necessary, knowledge of SQL, Tableau and/or ETL tools advantageousExperience working with a Data Analyst team preferable but not essential.What We OfferOur benefits package incorporates what we're passionate about - unlocking your future, overall well-being and sustainability - whilst giving you control over your benefits.* 15 days of holiday per year and an extra day for each year of service up to 20 days* 401K - Saving Incentive plan* Medical and Dental Insurance plans* Flexible Spending Accounts* Vision benefits* Great learning and development opportunities* Life Assurance and Disability insurance* Option to opt into the Ascential Shares SchemeIn addition, we offer flexible benefit packages that include Childcare Vouchers; Cycle to Work; Retail Vouchers; Gourmet Card; Gym Flex; Gadget Insurance, Health Assessments and Will Writing.We also place great importance on health, lifestyle and wellbeing consistently, in which you will have the options to fuel up on free fruit, attend yoga sessions, join our running club, or perhaps taking up on a lunchtime massages.About EdgeEdge by Ascential delivers some of the industry's most accurate and actionable sales-driving data, insights and advisory solutions for global brands and retailers looking to win in today's ecommerce-driven world.Formerly Brand View, Clavis Insight, One Click Retail and PlanetRetail RNG, Edge by Ascential was launched in October of 2018, bringing four brands under one roof. Our market leading products are a product of our people and we are always in the market for top talent.If you are interested in progressing your career, this position represents a great opportunity to join our team at an exciting stage in its development and expansion. Edge is headquartered in London, with offices in the USA, UK, China, Germany and France. Find out more at www.ascentialedge.comWant More Info?Find out more on what our people say:Ascential YouTube ChannelIf we inspire you, why not join and inspire us?,About the Lead Data Analyst at Headspace:

Headspace is looking for a Lead Data Analyst, based in our Los Angeles office, reporting into the Director of Data Science and Analytics.

In this role, you’ll offer a strong data-driven perspective and have the opportunity to provide meaningful insights that are directly reflected in product and business decisions. The ideal candidate has outstanding analytical and technical skills, commercial acumen, time management, and the ability to clearly synthesize information into actionable recommendations for executives and stakeholders. Additionally, this person will have a strong ownership mentality, experience in a fast-paced environment and is passionate about the mission.
How your skills and passion will come to life at Headspace:
Provide ad-hoc data analysis, deep dives, data visualizations, and statistical modeling
Lead a holistic approach towards defining KPIs for features and the overall business to develop and inform initiatives from a data-derived perspective
Partner closely with business owners to identify and evaluate strategic opportunities to drive growth for the company and increase engagement within the Headspace app
Collaborate with other members of the data science & analytics team, and the data engineering team to create a data-driven culture
Design A/B multivariate tests to drive product and growth improvements
Evaluate the impact of new product features on engagement and growth metrics
Transform business problems into solvable analytics problems and provide recommendations to stakeholders to drive improvements at Headspace
Develop predictive models to help inform future performance
What you’ve accomplished:
BA/BS degree in statistics, computer science, mathematics or engineering
5+ years of professional experience in a quantitative analytics role at a Consumer Product company, preferably early stage/startup, with extensive experience in distilling insights for executive leadership
Strong SQL, Python and quantitative skills as well as experience with big data and/or complex data sets; Experience with SparkSQL, Databricks and Tableau (or applicable) preferred
Experience working with cross functional teams and interfacing with executive stakeholders
Analytically minded, resourceful and a structured problem solver and know how to evaluate data with a thoughtful and critical eye
How we feel about Diversity & Inclusion:

Headspace is committed to bringing together humans from different backgrounds and perspectives, providing employees with a safe and welcoming work environment free of discrimination and harassment. We strive to create a diverse & inclusive environment where everyone can thrive, feel a sense of belonging, and do impactful work together. As an equal opportunity employer, we prohibit any unlawful discrimination against a job applicant on the basis of their race, color, religion, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, national origin, family or parental status, disability*, age, veteran status, or any other status protected by the laws or regulations in the locations where we operate. We respect the laws enforced by the EEOC and are dedicated to going above and beyond in fostering diversity across our workplace.

*Applicants with disabilities may be entitled to reasonable accommodation under the terms of the Americans with Disabilities Act and certain state or local laws. A reasonable accommodation is a change in the way things are normally done which will ensure an equal employment opportunity without imposing undue hardship on Headspace. Please inform our Talent team if you need any assistance completing any forms or to otherwise participate in the application process.

How to get started:

If you’re excited by the idea of seeing yourself in this role at Headspace, please apply with your CV and a cover letter that best expresses your interest and unique qualifications.,Neustar is an information services and technology company and a leader in identity resolution providing the data and technology that enables trusted connections between companies and people at the moments that matter most. More information is available at https://www.home.neustar.

Job Requisition:

R-3072 Data Analytics Insights Analyst (Open)

Primary Location:

LOS ANGELES

Job Description:

Data Analytics Insights Analyst– NY/SF/LA
Who are we?
As a company built on the foundation of Privacy by Design, for more than 20 years Neustar’s unique capabilities have made us the leader in the field of responsible identity resolution. Neustar enables trusted connections between companies and people at the moments that matter most, with world-class and industry leading solutions in Marketing, Risk, Communications, Security and Registry services.
What is a Data Analytics Insights Analyst?
Neustar is looking for talented analysts with excellent quantitative and analytical skills. Our ideal candidates are determined to combine the art and science of data analytics and marketing to help clients address the complex challenges of marketing effectiveness, ROI, brand equity impact, channel effectiveness, and pricing. In the Data Analytics Insights Analyst role, you’ll work with senior data scientists on multi-million dollar customer engagements. You’ll build your network with the top marketing leadership in major companies across virtually all industries. You’ll work hands on with quantitative marketing data to analyze and reveal the business drivers of the Fortune 500. You will develop expertise at the intersection of big data, marketing, and consulting. Our work is not just about delivering a project and moving on to the next challenge. Instead, it’s about delivering an evolving stream of value and enabling fact-based decision making.
What you will be doing:
You’ll help clients know everything they can about their customers and prospects, deliver exceptional customer experiences, and know if their marketing worked and how to make it better.
You’ll help diagnose business needs, translate into questions that Neustar will answer, and architect ways to wrangle data from multiple sources.
You’ll work closely with Neustar’s data scientists and consultants to identify new insights, translate findings into the stakeholder’s native language and tell stories to make complex things simple to understand and translate into measurable actions.
You’ll implement our unified analytics solutions to address marketing effectiveness, return on investment (ROI), brand equity impact, segmentation, pricing, and environmental factors.
Work with senior data scientists to ensure model quality in terms of modeling methodologies, data / model validation metrics, actionable insights, and analytical/technical best practices.
In our Neustar proprietary analytics platform implement multi-touch attribution models (MTA) and marketing mix models (MMM) that are based on statistics, econometrics, and/or machine learning techniques such as logistic regression, choice model, time-series model, panel data model, Bayesian statistics, ridge regression, structural equations, probability theory, clustering algorithms, etc.
Analyze big data sets to generate deep insights on paid media, organic media, market conditions, web navigations, and individuals’ propensities on multi-step conversion activities in the consumer journeys.
Validate model results and package them into insightful client-friendly reports on ROI analysis, forecasting, simulation and optimization.
Ensure rigorous quality control and detect anomalies in the model with ongoing new data stream.
Interdisciplinary work: you’ll interact with multiple teams across the firm to implement our end-to-end solutions and improve processes: Data Operations, Solution Architects, Consulting Services, Product and Engineering.
What we would love to see:
Familiarity or interest in data analytics and/or statistical concepts such as marketing mix modeling, digital attribution modeling, multivariate regression, time-series modeling, Bayesian statistics, segmentation modeling, machine learning, data mining, simulation, optimization, forecasting, and ROI analysis
Working knowledge of Excel, SQL, R, and Python or similar
Bachelor’s degree (required) with mathematical or engineering background: Statistics, Data Mining, Operations Research, Econometrics, Finance, Engineering or similar
An effective cross functional communicator in both written and verbal skills
Ability to manage multiple projects with a large cross-functional team
Ability and willingness to learn in a fast paced environment and adapt to the situation
1 to 3 years of quantitative analytics experience with marketing metrics and tracking is helpful but not required
Why work for us?
At Neustar, we are committed to the growth and development of our employees whose individual skills, curiosity and passion for their work, contribute to the overall success of our business. Our core values (Accountability, Collaboration, Transparency, Resilience, and Respect) are the driving force of our culture across our locations around the globe. We offer our employees a comprehensive benefits package including perks such as tuition reimbursement, awesome company discounts, back-up day care, community service events, pet and baby swag and much more! We are all learning and creating together; and having some major fun along the way.
JOIN US! We can’t wait to meet you!

Neustar does not accept unsolicited resumes from external firms or agencies. Neustar will not be responsible for placement fees associated with unsolicited resumes.

DIVERSITY
Diversity, inclusion and teamwork are second nature to Neustar; and these values permeate our entire business structure. Neustar is committed to creating an environment where a wide spectrum of opinions and beliefs are actively sought, listened to and respected. Further, our talented workforce draws from the many geographic areas and markets in which Neustar operates worldwide, which represents a distinct competitive advantage. The rich and varied personal and professional backgrounds of our employees make Neustar a dynamic and rewarding company at which to build a career. We invite you to join us.

EOE of Minorities/Females/Vets/Disability
Neustar, Inc. considers all applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, or status as a Vietnam-era or special disabled veteran in accordance with federal law and other state and local requirements. Neustar, Inc., complies with applicable state and local laws prohibiting discrimination in employment and provides reasonable accommodation to qualified individuals with disabilities in accordance with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) and applicable state and local laws.,Our leading Entertainment client is seeking a Survey Data Analyst to join their team for 6 months!
Role:
Our client is seeking a contract quantitative Survey Data Analyst who can tell a story with data from internal tracker studies combined with behavioral metrics.
Team:
You’ll join a small, collaborative group of Product Consumer Insights researchers who work side-by-side with other Researchers, Product Managers, Product Designers, Engineers and Data Scientists to understand consumer behavior, measure brand perceptions and guide product innovations.
Responsibilities:
Point-person and team resident expert on tracking data
Manage large-scale, global survey trackers and analyze data trends across multiple regions
Customer Satisfaction Survey & Cancel Survey
Synthesize secondary, quantitative and behavioral data to tell a compelling story with actionable insights
Survey data manipulation in Excel or SPSS, combining and analyzing survey data with behavioral data
Quant survey questionnaire writing/editing
Developing of sample composition and weighting approach
Creative data visualization while report writing
Develop research reports in Google Slides
Qualifications:
5+ years of work experience as a data analyst or survey researcher with strong skills in survey data analysis and reporting to support global brands
Experience working in a tech or media industry is a plus
Experience working in an a/b testing culture is a plus
A very strong aptitude for data and statistics including fluency in Excel and SPSS/R and ability to confidently converse with our analytics partners
Experience in quant survey design/writing and developing a sample and weighting approach for global research
Comfortable creating tab and banner plans & communicating with data processing
Experience in SQL to link behavioral data with survey data is a plus
Strong data visualization skills in Google Slides or PowerPoint to convey information and results clearly
Knowledge of data visualization and dashboard design in Tableau is a plus
Foundation in basic statistics (e.g., hypothesis testing, correlations, regressions)
Creativity and attention to detail
Highly collaborative and self-direct,Senior Data Analyst
Location/City: Any US location (offices in Atlanta, GA and Playa Vista, CA)

Responsibilities
We are looking for a sharp, highly-motivated Senior Data Analyst to join our team. If you have a natural curiosity, the technical skill to apply that curiosity in investigating large data sets, and an ability to tell a story with data and visualization, we want to hear from you! This is a high-impact role that will bridge the gap between the business and data by collaborating with our executive stakeholders and our external partners to derive insights from our data and drive improvements to the business. In addition to helping the company make data-driven decisions to improve operations, your work will be used in newspaper and magazine articles and in discussions with policymakers. This will require a solid understanding of the company’s strategic and operational goals as well as a customer-first mindset and the ability to communicate at the executive level.
As a Senior Data Analyst, you will:
Work with our bank transaction and customer event data to develop insights about the nature of employment and earnings for our Members.
Surface data-driven insights that drive strategy and optimal decision making for the leaders across the organization.
Create visualizations and other reporting that distill complex data into actionable information for executives and external stakeholders.
Help drive a data-first culture where data is understood and leveraged in decision making.
Effectively balance competing priorities and deadlines, with an eye on both short term delivery with long term direction and value.
Create testing and monitoring processes to ensure that our data is of the highest quality.
Automate relentlessly so your and others’ time can be spent on high-value analysis rather than running reports.
Collaborate with the data team and Chief Data Officer to define the technical strategy for Steady’s data ecosystem

Skills & Requirements
Minimum of 3 years experience (5-7 years preferred) performing exploratory data analysis to understand the characteristics of a data set and identify patterns.
Demonstrated experience of efficient manipulation and storage of large datasets
Comfortable dealing with ambiguity, making assumptions, drawing conclusions and distilling complex analysis for non-technical audiences
Outstanding verbal and written communication skills with the ability to interact at all levels of the organization as well as with external stakeholders
Hands on experience and expertise with SQL, Spark, Python (preferred) or R
Strong data visualization skills (experience with Tableau preferred)
Experience with data warehousing, preferably with Snowflake, and knowledge of ETL/ELT best practices.
Familiarity and experience with the AWS data ecosystem (S3, AWS Glue, EMR, etc.)
Experience with bank or credit card transaction data preferred
Experience with statistical models and machine learning or with working closely with Data Scientists a plus
Comfortable working cross-functionally with different parts of the organization and with distributed teams across multiple offices and timezones
Ability to thrive in a fast-paced, entrepreneurial, high-energy environment with shifting priorities


Benefits
We value our Steady Team Members and are committed to their success. We are located in downtown Atlanta near MARTA, as well as in Playa Vista CA. We offer competitive compensation packages and a 100% company-paid benefits package including medical, dental, and vision. Steady is a relaxed, casual work environment with flexible hours and lunch provided once weekly in addition to a weekly meal stipend. We also offer a generous PTO plan, 401K, and future growth opportunities within the company. We strive to maintain a positive and fun environment for our employees where people can learn and grow with the company.
About Steady
Steady is a mission-driven business that helps people earn more. Through the free Steady app users can build & track income, networks, and buying power – allowing them to augment retirement savings, work around childcare responsibilities, pay down debt, save for purchases, and supplement their income from primary employers, while limiting their income volatility and better positioning themselves for access to a sustainable financial services ecosystem.
Every Steady member will build something different. We celebrate those who take the initiative to create a path that works for them. Whatever that looks like, Steady is there to support it, providing a stable foundation that allows people to build financial success over a lifetime.

Mission: Steady turns the tables by putting workers back in charge of their financial future with an income-building platform that creates financial stability and helps its users to take charge of their future.

For more information, visit us at www.steadyapp.com or on Twitter @TheSteadyApp.

Steady, Platform Inc. (Steady) is an Equal Employment Opportunity employer – All qualified applicants/employees will receive consideration for employment without regard to that individual’s age, race, color, religion or creed, national origin or ancestry, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, physical or mental disability, veteran status, genetic information, ethnicity, citizenship, or any other characteristic protected by law.
Statement to ALL Third-Party Agencies and Similar Organizations: Steady accepts resumes only from agencies with which we formally engage their services. Please do not forward resumes to our applicant tracking system, Steady employees, Steady hiring manager, or send to any Steady facility. Steady is not responsible for any fees or charges associated with unsolicited resumes.,Lucky Day Entertainment, Inc. is a startup based in Los Angeles, CA. Our mission is to impact lives for the better by creating winning moments for anyone.

With our first product, Lucky Day, we reimagined the lottery. Lucky Day is a top 10 free app on the Google Play Store with over 10 million installs. It gives anyone the chance to win cold hard cash by playing free scratchers and lotto. Incredibly, we've managed to pay our players over $8 millions since we started in 2015! Our goal for 2019 alone is $10 million and we are well on our way. All without ever taking a dime from our players.

We’re looking for intelligent people to join our team in building out Lucky Day and our exciting new products from the ground up. People that see barriers as a challenge, and want to break the status quo. Come help us build new ways for people to experience winning moments.
What You'll Do
Define and implement business metrics and KPIs and deliver actionable analyses
Own the design, development, and maintenance of ongoing metrics, dashboards, analyses, and roadmaps
Partner closely with the leadership, Product, and Tech teams to drive product decisions
Design and analyze A/B multivariate tests to drive KPI improvement
Build high-impact dashboards and analytic tools to increase visibility on our data
What You'll Bring
Bachelor’s Degree in a field such as Computer Science, Electric engineering or equivalent work
2+ years of experience in data management or analysis
2+ years of experience with SQL
Experience working with large data sets
Experience working with a Business Intelligence tool (Tableau, Amplitude, Mode)
Self-starter attitude and able to work independently as well as in a team environment,System1 is looking for a driven data analyst with the ability to work with our Ad Operations team. As a member of this data analysis team, you will drive System1’s analytics initiatives forward, provide insights into our business operations, and work with the product team to spearhead data-driven decisions.
The Role You Will Have
The data expert: be familiar with the full life-cycle of all data at System1 - from data collection to processing to analytics
The “insight” person: leverage data to discover and validate areas of opportunities, and identify the metrics to measure success
The translator: guide business stakeholders in reading into the data, and facilitate the communication between business and tech teams
The mentor: provide support to the junior members and establish data best practices for the AdOps team
What You Will Bring
3+ years of relevant full-time work experience
Bachelor’s in Computer Science or other quantitative subject (mathematics, economics, finance, or statistics) preferred
Strong SQL & Python skills a plus
Experience in big data tools a plus
Prior product analytic experience in consumer applications or gaming a plus
What We Have to Offer
Free Uber/Lyft to and from work every day!
Collegial and collaborative team with highly intelligent and motivated coworkers
Cross-team lunches and demos to foster learning
Unlimited Paid Sick Time, Competitive PTO and Benefits package
Daily catered meals and fully stocked kitchen
Bi-weekly happy hour at various bars, restaurants, and venues across Los Angeles
Bi-weekly onsite happy hour
Catered dinner on Tuesdays and Thursdays
Weekly fitness class with private trainer: high intensity training, yoga, beach volleyball, beach soccer, ultimate frisbee
Company parties and outings: Skyzone indoor skydiving, Medieval Times, Karaoke, etc.,Who we are

Lucky Day Entertainment, Inc. is a startup based in Los Angeles, CA. Our mission is to impact lives for the better by creating winning moments for anyone.

With our first product, Lucky Day, we reimagined the lottery. Lucky Day is a top 10 free app on the Google Play Store with over 10 million installs. Since 2015, we’ve paid our players over $8 millions — all without ever taking a dime from our players.

We’re looking for intelligent people to join our team in building out Lucky Day and our exciting new products from the ground up.

What you'll do

First and foremost, our team is intrinsically motivated and driven. We encourage each other to be curious, experiment and ask for help. Everyone has a voice - it’s who we are as a team, and it’s how we build great products.

At Lucky Day, we work closely with a nimble team to push the envelope toward outstanding user experiences. As the Data Analyst you will be responsible for analyzing our Lucky Day data by working with our team as you develop, test, and create scalable data warehouses and pipelines for the first version of the product and ongoing product development.
Responsibilities
Define and implement business metrics and KPIs and deliver actionable analyses
Own the design, development, and maintenance of ongoing metrics, dashboards, analyses, and roadmaps
Partner closely with the leadership, Product, and Tech teams to drive product decisions
Design and analyze A/B multivariate tests to drive KPI improvement
Build high-impact dashboards and analytic tools to increase visibility on our data
Work closely with the Product, Data Science & BI teams to design, build & test end-to-end solutions.
And other duties as assigned
Qualifications
Bachelor’s Degree in a field such as Computer Science, Electric engineering or equivalent work
5+ years of experience in data management or analysis
5+ years of experience with SQL
Experience working with large data sets
Experience working with a Business Intelligence tool (Periscope, preferably)
Self-starter attitude and able to work independently as well as in a team environment
Benefits
Medical, Dental, and Vision Insurance
Flexible work hours
Unlimited PTO Policy
Daily lunches and snacks
Regular team outings
Performance bonuses
Competitive compensation
Work in a startup culture with people that are as driven as you
Career growth

There’s a lot of flexibility and growth opportunity at Lucky Day. You’ll work one-on-one with your coach/mentor to set and reach goals, find new opportunities, and grow professionally and personally. At a minimum, you’ll have a meaningful impact on popular and highly visible products, influence new products, become familiar with new technology, and be able to demonstrate the results of your work.,Netflix, the world's leading Internet-television network, is seeking an individual to join its growing global Public Policy team, and more specifically the Strategic Engagement and Analytics (SEAL) team. Much of the work that SEAL does is forward-looking and proactive in nature and we are seeking a data analyst to ensure that our Public Policy positions are supported by evidence and data. The role would ideally be based in LA and would include working with teams all over the world. The successful candidate will have responsibility for gathering data internally and externally and providing relevant analysis within the context of public policy work.,Los Angeles based, Internet Brands is looking for a Data Analyst to join our team. You will be responsible for developing predictive models that provide our business units with reliable insights and visualization.

In this role, you will:
Iteratively and quickly develop predictive models.
Use analytics to build cohorts in order to identify opportunities in high value segments.
Understand subject matter KPIs, trends and cohorts in order to improve upon existing methodologies.
Collaborate with software engineers and business owners to define product requirements and model parameters.
Work with engineering teams to automate and scale predictive model solutions.
Develop and maintain a testing framework for monitoring short and long term results of predictive models.
Deliver presentations to senior leadership to explain and illustrate complex analytical findings.
Qualifications:
4+ years experience in a hands-on analytical role with a focus on analyzing business problems.
- Deep understanding of web analytics.
Experience prototyping models in excel.
Strong analytical, conceptual, and problem-solving abilities.
High level of comfort with large relational data sets, database mining and manipulation.
Experience in tools used for data analysis and reporting (SQL, Excel, Tableau).
Clear written and oral communication skills.
Understanding of machine learning techniques and algorithms.
About Internet Brands:

Headquartered in El Segundo, Calif., Internet Brands® is a fully integrated online media and software services organization focused on four high-value vertical categories: Health, Automotive, Legal, and Home/Travel. The company's award-winning consumer websites lead their categories and serve more than 250 million monthly visitors, while a full range of web presence offerings has established deep, long-term relationships with SMB and enterprise clients. Internet Brands' powerful, proprietary operating platform provides the flexibility and scalability to fuel the company's continued growth. Internet Brands is a portfolio company of KKR and Temasek. For more information, please visit www.internetbrands.com.

Internet Brands and its wholly owned affiliates are an equal opportunity employer.,System1 is looking for a driven data analyst with the ability to work with our Ad Operations team. As a member of this data analysis team, you will drive System1’s analytics initiatives forward, provide insights into our business operations, and work with the product team to spearhead data-driven decisions.
The Role You Will Have
The data expert: be familiar with the full life-cycle of all data at System1 - from data collection to processing to analytics
The “insight” person: leverage data to discover and validate areas of opportunities, and identify the metrics to measure success
The translator: guide business stakeholders in reading into the data, and facilitate the communication between business and tech teams
The mentor: provide support to the junior members and establish data best practices for the AdOps team
What You Will Bring
3+ years of relevant full-time work experience
Bachelor’s in Computer Science or other quantitative subject (mathematics, economics, finance, or statistics) preferred
Strong SQL & Python skills a plus
Experience in big data tools a plus
What We Have to Offer
Free Uber/Lyft to and from work every day!
Collegial and collaborative team with highly intelligent and motivated coworkers
Cross-team lunches and demos to foster learning
Unlimited Paid Sick Time, Competitive PTO and Benefits package
Daily catered meals and fully stocked kitchen
Bi-weekly happy hour at various bars, restaurants, and venues across Los Angeles
Bi-weekly onsite happy hour
Catered dinner on Tuesdays and Thursdays
Weekly fitness class with private trainer: high intensity training, yoga, beach volleyball, beach soccer, ultimate frisbee
Company parties and outings: Skyzone indoor skydiving, Medieval Times, Karaoke, etc.,WebMD/Medscape is searching for a Data Analyst to join our team!The Data Analyst's primary role is to provide data and analysis support for tracking and reporting within Medscape. This position requires an ability to understand the key metrics of a business and to develop reporting based on business requirements. The analyst will work in a project team-oriented and dynamic environment which will require working closely with other teams and adjusting to new developments as they arise. Various software packages and tools will be utilized in order to collect, mine, and report on this data. Strong analytical and communication skills with a proven ability to meet deadlines is critical for this position.What You Will Be Doing:* Performing advanced analysis of web traffic, email engagement, and app engagement data to understand and measure the success of programs, including click through analysis, retention, re-engagement and A/B testing.* Create insightful, easy to understand reports that provide performance, trending and benchmarking analysis to meet business needs.* Provide ad-hoc analyses using various skills and tools to extract and aggregate data. Apply a broad range of analytical approaches, from back-of-envelope approximations to detailed deep dives in order to identify trends and new opportunities* Collaborate with various business and operational groups to explore new feature ideas by mining existing web analytics data, designing A/B tests, and evaluating the results to produce recommendations and insights that will help shape business decisions.* Investigate significant changes in traffic and identify the cause of the changes through investigation using SQL or excel.* Serve as a subject matter expert on data analysis and related best practices to business partners.* Create, maintain, automate, and enhance reporting template(s) and customize as needed.* Multi-task and understand priorities of requests and projects in a dynamic environment.What's In It For You:* Besides a competitive compensation package, you'll be working with a great group of professionals in a culture that encourages innovation. If you're ready to take on some new challenges at a well-respected company, we'd love to hear from you.What You Need For This Position:* 3+ years' experience in data and/or statistical analysis and reporting is required* Bachelor's Degree in Statistics, Econometrics, Mathematics, Information Systems, Computer Science, Engineering, or related quantitative field preferred, or at least 7 years' of relevant professional experience with some combination of data analysis and reporting building* 3+ years of relational database experience in, but not limited to Postgres, SQL Server, Oracle, Vertica (or any Big Data environment)* Intermediate to expert level SQL skills are required as candidate must be able to write SQL queries from scratch as well as tune existing reporting queries* Advanced Excel skills are required. Must be proficient with advanced analytic functions such as vlookup, named ranges, pivot tables, formulas, etc.* Advanced experience with web analytics tools, such as Omniture and Google Analytics.* Experience with using A/B testing tools like Target or Optimizely, devising A/B tests, interpreting results, and summarizing the findings.* Experience with business intelligence tools is preferred such as Tableau or Microsoft BI.* Strong analytical, creative and problem-solving skills* Strong communication skills including experience in supporting and communicating data-driven analyses to various departments and stakeholders* Strong organization, attention to detail, and time management skills requiredPreferred:* Knowledge of personalization techniques, data science concepts, and/or information processing workflows are all nice-to-have'sAbout Internet Brands:Headquartered in El Segundo, Calif., Internet Brands® is a fully integrated online media and software services organization focused on four high-value vertical categories: Health, Automotive, Legal, and Home/Travel. The company's award-winning consumer websites lead their categories and serve more than 250 million monthly visitors, while a full range of web presence offerings has established deep, long-term relationships with SMB and enterprise clients. Internet Brands' powerful, proprietary operating platform provides the flexibility and scalability to fuel the company's continued growth. Internet Brands is a portfolio company of KKR and Temasek. For more information, please visit www.internetbrands.com.Internet Brands and its wholly owned affiliates are an equal opportunity employer.,Senior Data Analyst - User Growth
Los AngelesProduct - Product managerExperienced
Responsibilities
TikTok is the leading destination for short-form mobile video. Our mission is to inspire creativity and bring joy by offering a home for creative expression and an experience that is genuine, joyful, and positive.
Responsible for performance marketing measurement models through major platforms such as Facebook, Google, Snapchat, DSP, etc.
Manage user acquisition data tracking integrations both internally and with third parties
Build and analyze dashboards and reports, establish key data sets to empower operational and exploratory analysis, evaluate and define metrics
Forecast and set team goals, design and evaluate A/B tests, monitor key metrics, understand root causes of changes in metrics
Find actionable insights through funnels, cohort analyses, user segmentation, retention analyses and models to help us grow our product
Collaborate with business stakeholders to understand the business problems, proactively design best-suited, robust and scalable data endpoint
Partner with data engineers and data scientists on common areas of scalability, data quality management, data delivery management and performance optimization
Propose what to build in the future product roadmap, understand user behaviors and long-term trends, identify new levers to help move key user growth metrics
Qualifications
- Bachelor's or Master's degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, Statistics or related technical/quantitative field
3+ years of related experience with data querying languages, scripting languages, data visualization or statistical software
3+ years of professional experience in an analytical role involving data extraction, reporting, and analysis
Experience with mobile app attribution platforms (e.g. Appsflyer/Tune/Adjust)
Experience working with very large data sets and distributed computing (Hive/Hadoop/MapReduce)
Experience working with social and digital media data and other marketing analytics tools (e.g. Google Analytics/Adobe Analytics/Amplitude)
Strong quantitative modeling, statistical analysis and problem-solving skills
Strong business acumen, and excellent verbal and written communication skills with the ability to work effectively with product, marketing, and engineering teams in a cross-cultural and cross-functional environment
Passionate about social media and short video products
Even Better If:
Experience working with international partners in different time zones
Experience working in a fast-changing, hands-on work environment
Apply
Share to,Senior Data Analyst
Culver CityR&DExperienced
Responsibilities
Develop data-driven models and find actionable strategic insights to help improve software products and apps in TikTok’s platform. Analyze large-scale data and apply expertise in data mining, data warehousing and quantitative analysis. Develop methods and procedures from data collected by the marketing team from surveys, questionnaires, or polls; arrange the data into mathematical models; determine appropriate statistical methods; and build dashboards and data visualization. Establish statistical models to provide insightful data analysis based on large database and improve functions of news and video sharing apps. Develop and implement an improved statistical system to analyze different types of information to ensure data quality. Scale and automate data analyses to identify trends, conduct root cause analysis and suggest potential opportunities for process improvements. Collaborate with engineering and product teams to implement and monitor logging and metrics, in order to ensure correct data sources and dataset development.
Qualifications
Position requires Master’s degree in Statistics, Computer Science, Business Analytics or related field,

PLUS

24 months of experience in:

· Developing statistical models by analyzing large-scale data sets in large-scale distributed systems;

· Statistical software (R, SAS, or SPSS) and data mining;

· Scripting language (Python, PHP, or Perl);

· Relational database (SQL);

· Data visualization tool (Tableau);

· Data warehousing techniques.

The worksite is in Culver City, CA. We are interested in every qualified candidate who is eligible to work in the United States. However, we are not able to sponsor visas for the position.
Apply
Share to,Job Description
MyLife.com is seeking a Sr. Data Analyst to join our team who has a strong interest in online subscription based business models/relationships. This position is critical to help transform MyLife’s data analytics conclusions into ideas for enhancing product, marketing and consumer experience to achieve business goals that drive our profitable online People Search and Identity businesses.

Responsibilities:
Generate ideas and analyses for transforming My Life’s data into practical/actionable product and marketing initiatives pertaining to Acquisition, Conversion and Retention
Analyze, model, and forecast data using methodologies related to data mining, data warehousing, Reporting Services and Data Business Analytics with predictive modeling and strategy
Manipulate large volumes both internal and external data using database queries, scripting languages, automation and the latest BI tools
Communicate findings to technical and non-technical colleagues
Stay up to date on current data analysis methodologies and techniques and business analysis.
Experience:
7+ years in Data Analytics / Business Intelligence
Excellent understanding of SQL, statistics, algorithms and data structures
Comfortable with database schemas and capable of standardizing, cleaning, and aggregating data in Oracle and Netezza
Ideally, advanced skills in Micorstrategy and Tableau
Gravitate towards creating simplistic models to solve complex problems, as well as tackle the complicated issues
Proactive, self-starter who is happy working both independently and with a team of BI professionals and infrastructure
Interest in any and all of the following subjects:
Relationship/recommendation systems
Search
Presentation
Social network analysis
Segmentation
Conversion rate optimization
Lifetime value
Yield and retention analysis
Education:

Bachelor’s Degree required; preferred fields of study include: Economics, Business, Finance, Computer Science or Statistics Degrees. Advanced Degrees Preferred

What's in it for you:
Base Salary
Casual Atmosphere
Amazing benefits packages including medical, dental, vision, life insurance, FSA and 401k
Stock Options
PTO & Paid Holidays

Company Description
As an internet company we provide a Casual work environment with Flexible Start Times, Breakfast Bagel Mondays, a fully catered Friday lunch and plenty of company parties to celebrate our ongoing successes and product releases.

MyLife is the only reputation platform focused on making consumers safer and marketplaces more trusted through proprietary Reputation Profiles & Scores. We are also dedicated to helping people manage and monitor their own reputation to help them look their best, personally and professionally, to the people searching for them online

The company was founded in 2002 and is located in Los Angeles, CA, and has over 40 million members. For more information, please visit http://www.mylife.com.,Sr. Data Analyst — US Safety
Los AngelesOperations - Product opsExperienced
Responsibilities
About the Team:
As a Senior Data Analyst on TikTok's US Safety team, you will be instrumental in ensuring that TikTok remains a safe, trustworthy, and risk-free environment. By implementing your domain knowledge, you will help diagnose, triage, and treat large-scale safety issues. You will scope out projects, use ground-truth data to inform strategies, and, most importantly, use data and insights to form best-in-class heuristics to proactively detect and disarm safety incidents. As a member of this team, you will be working on US TikTok's top priority (user safety) with a variety of stakeholders across product, operations, policy, and engineering -- both locally and globally. This position will be full-time and will be based in our Los Angeles, CA location.

Main Responsibilities:
Use data to identify and forecast trends, conduct deep-dive quantitative analysis to identify root causes of safety incidents, understand user behavior, and determine objectives with achievable key results for the US Safety team to aspire to
Inform best practices for how quantitative analyses should be run, including aspects such as processing, cleaning, and ensuring ground-truth integrity
Experience in a variety of skills to draw insights from data, including but not limited to data mining, model development, statistical and regression techniques. You understand when to use these various methodologies based on the scope, size, and nuances of the problem
Collaborate with data teams across the globe to form best practices regarding data modeling and visualization; support these teams in the development of automated detection systems utilized to detect and, if possible, prevent safety incidents
Explore various data sources across TikTok to help identify new signals, trends, and tactics that are associated with abusive or unwanted behavior
Qualifications
Qualifications:
BA/BS in Computer Science, Math, Physics, Engineering, Statistics or other technical field
4+ years of experience in data science or doing quantitative analysis
Experience with statistical software (e.g., R, Python, MATLAB) and database languages (e.g., SQL)
Experience with a data visualization tool (e.g. Mode Analytics/Chartio/Tableau)
Preferred Qualifications:
Experience with advanced data modeling and predictive analytics
Experience working with international partners at different time zones
Desire to travel between various sites (Palo Alto, China, Southeast Asia) to manage projects and collaborate with stakeholders
Our mission:
Our mission is to capture and present the world's creativity, knowledge, and precious life moments, directly from the mobile phone. TikTok enables everyone to be a creator, and encourages users to share their passion and creative expression through their videos.
Apply
Share to,ACES/Central Flow is seeking Data Analysts for the NACF Central Data Analyst team. This is a new team that will be located at AZA3 (Tempe, Arizona) and support Fulfillment Centers across NACF.
A successful candidate will be highly organized, extremely detailed, self-motivated, able to handle confidential information, as well as a possess a demonstrate ability to respond effectively to changing workloads and priorities. Must have the ability to communicate well and to manage multiple assignments and people simultaneously. Other responsibilities will include: Configuration requests from NA FCs, Launch Teams, the ACES SME Team, and running projects related to Centralized Flow in order to improve the process and operations of multiple Fulfillment Centers (FCs).

Key areas of responsibility include researching and analyzing issues, participation in pilots, fixing bugs, and partnering with FCs on building Excel tools, automating reporting, and ICQA research, including IRDR research and deep dives. A successful candidate will have a strong blend of project management skills, with an ability to conduct in-depth analyses, think big, and identify strategic opportunities.


Basic Qualifications

· High School Diploma or Equivalent Diploma
· 3+ years of experience with Excel spreadsheets and data analysis
· 2+ years of experience creating VBA code and tool writing
· 2+ years of experience working with SQL; demonstrating fluency

Preferred Qualifications

· 2+ years of Data Analyst or Research Analyst experience
· Demonstrated problem solving skills and analytical skills
· Proven ability to clearly communicate with managers at all levels
· Global perspective and solid understanding of business objectives
· Excellent attention to detail and work with the highest level of accuracy
· Initiative to develop tools, data collection processes, and data management systems
· Understanding of Kibana toolset

Amazon is committed to a diverse and inclusive workplace. Amazon is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of race, national origin, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, protected veteran status, disability, age, or other legally protected status. For individuals with disabilities who would like to request an accommodation, please visit https://www.amazon.jobs/en/disability/us.,At Seer, we pride ourselves on innovation; standing out among the rest and enabling our clients to do the same. We're a Digital Marketing Agency powered by Big Data to drive integrated, holistic strategy for our clients. We get excited at the thought of bringing together millions of data points from disparate data sets (including qualitative!) to drive empathy-fueled opportunities and insights at scale. Big Data, automation, and problem solving at scale: it's what's for breakfast. Could this be love? Maybe.

What about you? You’re a data-obsessed problem-solver. You pay attention to the details without losing sight of the big picture. You know how to think critically and turn business problems into data problems. You’re quick to pick up patterns and patient enough to identify long-term trends. You're detail-oriented, logical, and endlessly curious about how big data is used to inform digital marketing.
Here are some highlights of what you'll be doing...
You’ll be entrenched in the data; working across divisions to turn business problems into data problems through critical thinking and consulting skills
You’ll help manage Seer’s data warehouse leveraging BigQuery and SQL expertise to optimize queries and drive other cost-saving opportunities
You’ll work within our data warehouse, using BigQuery and pulling business insights out of data
You’ll create dashboards in Data Studio & Power BI to display data for greater cross-divisional analysis and crafting strategy
You’ll complete cross-divisional training, gaining a strong foundation of PPC, SEO, Analytics, and how they all work together
You'll contribute to the Seer blog, industry forums, and grow your thought leadership skills from the ground up
The skills you'll bring to the table...
You're an innovator. You're excited to work with Big Data and use your experience in SQL to problem solve and answer business questions
You've worked with data visualization tools, specifically Power BI and/or Data Studio
You have relevant internship experience or hands-on project experience working with data
You take initiative and can self-direct in the absence of detailed guidelines
You’re comfortable managing deadlines for multiple deliverables and thrive in a fast-paced, open environment
You have a strong sense of self, which means you’re able to say no, deliver feedback, have the confidence to provide input, etc.
Bonus Points...
You have experience leveraging Python and APIs to access new data sources not available in the data warehouse
You can interpret API instructions and build MVPs to transfer data from an API into a database or flat file.
You have an understanding of digital marketing data, specifically SEO and PPC. Perhaps you’ve even worked in a marketing agency!? We should definitely chat!!


Sometimes the best opportunities are hidden by self-doubt. We disqualify ourselves before we have the opportunity to be considered. Regardless of where you came from, how you identify, or the path that led you here-- you are welcome. If you read this job description with a belly full of excitement, we’re just as excited about you. You’ve gotta apply though :),Netflix is a pioneer in the entertainment industry and a global provider of
streaming video content, now reaching over 180 million subscribers spread
across nearly every country in the world. Our customers consume billions of
hours of content per month on a myriad of devices, and business continues to
grow rapidly as we focus on penetrating key international markets.

In 2019, we spent $12 billion on films, TV shows, and other exciting content,
much of which will be branded Netflix Originals. As we venture to become the
world s greatest movie studio, we must successfully develop studio tools th
will keep us nimble and effective. To that end, our organization is fast-
growing and is a critical part of the business.

This area owns all applications built internally to assist various Netflix
Content finance teams, and we are looking for a senior data analyst to support
our finance team. Leaning on a consistent record in customer support with
large-scale enterprises, we expect this role to drive our efforts to support a
suite of apps that handle the company's content spend (covering programming,
budgeting and forecasting, deal tracking, payments, accounting, and financial
reporting).
Los Gatos, California Product Core Engineering Senior Data Analyst - Studio
Finance Engineering Netflix is a pioneer in the entertainment industry and a
global provider of streaming video content, now reaching over 180 million
subscribers spread across nearly every country in the world. Our customers
consume billions of hours of content per month on a myriad of devices, and
business continues to grow rapidly as we focus on penetrating key international
markets. In 2019, we spent $12 billion on films, TV shows, and other exciting
content, much of which will be branded Netflix Originals. As we venture to
become the world s greatest movie studio, we must successfully develop stud
tools that will keep us nimble and effective. To that end, our organization is
fast-growing and is a critical part of the business. This area owns all
applications built internally to assist various Netflix Content finance teams,
and we are looking for a senior data analyst to support our finance team.
Leaning on a consistent record in customer support with large-scale
enterprises, we expect this role to drive our efforts to support a suite of
apps that handle the company's content spend (covering programming, budgeting
and forecasting, deal tracking, payments, accounting, and financial reporting).
Build reports and visualizations to support finance and content teams
Understand and own our financial data to connect data sets across our studio
suite of applications
Work on SQL, Hive, Spark, Presto, R, Python, etc to drive analysis.
Create and monitor errors and alerts to maintain data quality
Partner with product managers and non-technical users to translate loose
business questions into actionable reports and insights
Partner with engineering teams to understand our data
Analytical skills with an excellent grasp of SQL, R, Python, etc.
Experience and expertise with at least 2 reporting tools such as tableau,
Looker, etc
You enjoy working with data to identify patterns, anomalies and opportunities
You love to use data to drive decision-making.
Focus on accuracy as these reports are used for key business decision-making
and external reporting.
Exposure to Machine learning, Data science models is a bonus
Experience with ETL is a plus
Experience with visual / UI design a plus
Show moreShow less,Netflix is a pioneer in the entertainment industry and a global provider of streaming video content, now reaching over 180 million subscribers spread across nearly every country in the world. Our customers consume billions of hours of content per month on a myriad of devices, and business continues to grow rapidly as we focus on penetrating key international markets.In 2019, we spent $12 billion on films, TV shows, and other exciting content, much of which will be branded Netflix Originals. As we venture to become the world's greatest movie studio, we must successfully develop studio tools that will keep us nimble and effective. To that end, our organization is fast-growing and is a critical part of the business.This area owns all applications built internally to assist various Netflix Content finance teams, and we are looking for a senior data analyst to support our finance team. Leaning on a consistent record in customer support with large-scale enterprises, we expect this role to drive our efforts to support a suite of apps that handle the company's content spend (covering programming, budgeting and forecasting, deal tracking, payments, accounting, and financial reporting).,Are you the type of person who feels they could solve any problem if they just had the right data? Are you someone who can spot the hidden trends in metrics and come up with compelling arguments to explain them?

We are seeking a strong Finance & Accounting Data Analyst to help us better understand and manage the Poshmark marketplace through rigorous business analysis and insights. This role provides a unique opportunity to analyze business critical problems, and present recommendations and insights to the executive team at Poshmark.

The ideal candidate will bring a strong business mindset for approaching problems in a quantitative way, and will have the technical skills for data extraction and manipulation. This is the perfect opportunity for someone with 2-3 years experience to gain valuable experience and drive decisions at a high-growth company.

Responsibilities
Provide data driven insights, forecasts and actionable recommendations to key stakeholders. Understand and meet their analytics needs on a continual basis.
Monitor existing metrics, analyze data, and partner with internal team members to identify opportunities for improvement. Develop key metrics and performance indicators to evaluate business performance
Perform exploratory data analysis to identify trends, patterns, correlations, and insights and provide business recommendations to the leadership team in a simple, clear and compelling manner
Think and work independently, demonstrate creativity and deliver quick results, yet demonstrate a team-player attitude
Work effectively with cross-functional teams, learn and apply best practices from other teams and always strive for high quality deliverables
Identify data quality and process improvement opportunities
Maintain required documentation to ensure inventory of all key findings from trends and growth opportunities
Identify the right metrics needed to appropriately manage our business, and work with the Data Engineering team to implement the data collection needed.
Identify the opportunities for automated monitoring and work with engineering team to get the automation implemented
6 Months Impact
Independently find and deliver analytics insights and forecasts in areas of business operations to drive high stakes business decisions
Develop an understanding on KPIs and analysis of supply and demand forces within a two sided marketplace
12 Months Impact
Own analytics and be the go-to person for data driven decision making for at least one business area
Continue to partner on solving business problems, and develop a strong relationship with the stakeholders.
Develop insight and knowledge of long term trends and factors influencing the business
Present synthesized data driven analysis and insights on the marketplace to the senior members/ executives
Requirements
Bachelor's degree in Math, Accounting, Finance, Statistics, Business or a related field. MBA or Masters in Analytics is a plus.
B.A./B.S. or equivalent degree with 2 to 3 years of business analysis experience Or M.S. with 1+ years of experience in analytics /business analysis / analytically oriented, data, or quantitative role e.g., business metrics reporting, finance, consulting, or marketing research
Strong data mining skills using SQL
Proficient Excel Skills
Problem solving attitude
Data Visualization through Looker
Understanding of data modeling concept and partnering on building new DW tables
Experience in gathering requirements and formulating business metrics for reporting.
Ability to communicate data, at a level appropriate for the audience
Strong interpersonal skills — including written and oral communication skills
Understanding of the Social network/ eCommerce industry is a bonus.
Thrive in a fast-paced start-up environment!
Why Poshmark?

Poshmark is a leading social commerce platform for the next generation of retailers and shoppers. Through technology, our mission is to build the world's most connected shopping experience, while empowering people to build thriving retail businesses. Since launching in 2011, Poshmark has become a vibrant social shopping community with seven million Seller Stylists helping 60 million users discover items they love from over 100 million listings. The company is backed by the world's leading investment firms including Mayfield, Menlo Ventures, GGV Capital, Temasek, Inventus Capital, Uncork Capital, Union Grove Venture Partners, Shea Ventures and AngelList. For more information, please visit www.poshmark.com, or find us on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest and YouTube.

About Us:

At Poshmark, we're constantly challenging the status quo and are looking for innovative and passionate people to help shape the future of Poshmark. We're disrupting the industry by combining social connections with e-commerce through data-driven solutions and the latest technology to optimize our platform. We're nothing without our amazing team who deliver an unparalleled social shopping experience to the millions of people we connect each day.

We built Poshmark around four core values: 1) focus on people to create empowered communities that drive success; 2) together we grow to support each other to strive for our dreams; 3) lead with love to foster genuine connections built upon a foundation of respect; and 4) embrace your weirdness to accept and empower one another on their own unique journey. We're invested in our team and community, working together to build an entirely new way to shop. That way, when we win, we all win together. Come help us build the most connected shopping experience ever.

Here's what we'll set you up with:
A team that is invested in your career growth and training
Competitive salary and equity, based on experience
Company sponsors up to 100% cost for your health, dental and vision plans and up to 90% for your dependents
Smartphone reimbursement
Work alongside world-class talent=
Flexible vacation / paid time off policy
Parental leave
Healthy and exciting catered lunches, snacks and beverages offered daily
Personal style encouraged (or not, whatever you're in to)
Fun company happy hours, parties, and offsite events
Poshmark is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We celebrate diversity and are committed to creating an inclusive environment for all employees.,Company Overview

Lodestone is a best of breed Digital Quality & Solutions company. We are a trusted partner to the world's leading tech companies and we act as digital stewards for products used by half the world's population on a daily basis -- we're honored to be tasked with this immense responsibility and we shoulder it with pride, joy, and dedication.

Check us out at www.lodestoneco.com

Description

Lodestone is looking for self-motivated people with close attention to detail to join our Data Quality Analytics team. As a Data Quality Analyst, you will play a key role working with Product, Program, and Operations teams to drive key Quality initiatives. You will be responsible to provide thought leadership and operational rigor to improve data quality in order and enhance the product experience for users worldwide. You have G-suite experience (docs, spreadsheets, and slides) or MS Office including Excel and Powerpoint.

This is a long-term, and full-time position based out of Menlo Park, California.

Responsibilities:

Conduct large scale reviews of content to determine the quality and importance of data
Become a subject matter expert and thought leader on content
Leverage policies, and more importantly, your own intuition to provide final authoritative decisions
Work in a highly collaborative team as the last line of defense to improve data quality

Minimum Qualifications:
Ability to follow instructions and guidelines in a detail oriented fashion
Great communication and collaboration skillls and prior experience working with cross-functional teams
Ability to manage time effectively and prioritize issues while maintaining the level of quality and efficiency
Self-motivated and able to manage workload independently

Preferred Qualifications:
Prior experience with Content moderation
Willing to pick up side projects relating to the field
BA/BS in a critical thinking, quantitative field such as business, economics, engineering, math (or related field)
Found the typo in this job description and included it in your application
Experience in data analytics,The Machine Learning (ML) Services team within AWS is responsible for setting the strategy and delivering machine learning services across multiple segments and requirements to AWS customers.

Amazons ML services team is seeking a Senior Data Analyst to help with business intelligence and reporting initiatives. Amazon has a culture of data-driven decision-making, and demands business intelligence that is timely, accurate, and actionable.

The Team operates in a fast paced environment where every day brings new challenges and new opportunities. As a Data Analyst, you will be supporting BI infrastructure to address some of the unique challenges. You will be responsible for managing consistent data flows among sources and BI platform, looking into Data Quality issues and addressing them on day to day basis. You will also be working closely with Product Managers, Software Development Managers and Finance teams to handle the growing business needs.

Responsibilities
You know and love working with business intelligence tools including Tableau, Excel spreadsheets and SQL to model multidimensional datasets, and can partner with cross-functional teams to answer key business questions. You are analytical and creative. You will also have the opportunity to display your skills in the following areas:
· Interface with other technology teams to extract, transform, and load data from a wide variety of data sources using ETLs, PL/SQL and SQL.
· Interface with business customers to gather requirements.
· Understand Data Models and metadata to support ad-hoc and pre-built reporting.
· Respond to high priority requests from business users.
· Own the maintenance of ongoing metrics, reports, analyses and dashboards etc. to drive key business decisions.
· Recognize and adopt best practices in reporting and analysis: data integrity, test design, analysis, validation, and documentation.
· Write ad-hoc reporting queries.
· Analyze and solve problems at their root, stepping back to understand the broader context.
· Use data mining, model building, and other analytical techniques.
· Learn and understand a broad range of Amazons data.
· Continually improve ongoing reporting and analysis processes, automating or simplifying self-service support for secondary datasets

Amazon is an Equal Opportunity-Affirmative Action Employer Minority / Female / Disability / Veteran / Gender Identity / Sexual Orientation





Basic Qualifications

· 7+ years of experience in relevant business domains, including data warehousing and business intelligence tools, techniques and technology, or experience in analytics, business analysis or comparable consumer analytics solutions.
· Bachelors degree in Computer Science, Engineering, Math, Finance, Statistics or related discipline.
· Knowledge and expertise with SQL, Oracle or OLAP. Redshift, any other databases.
· Knowledge of data warehousing concepts.
· Knowledge and direct experience using business intelligence reporting tools. (OBIEE, Business Objects, Cognos, Tableau, MicroStrategy, SSAS Cubes, Datanet etc.)






Preferred Qualifications

· MBA
· Ability to understand the data and handle data quality issues and respond to customer queries.
· Experience in using Python, R, Julia, or Matlab or other statistical/machine learning software
· Strong communication and presentation skills
· Experience with statistical modeling / machine learning,Company Overview

Lodestone is a best of breed Digital Quality & Solutions company. We are a trusted partner to the world's leading tech companies and we act as digital stewards for products used by half the world's population on a daily basis -- we're honored to be tasked with this immense responsibility and we shoulder it with pride, joy, and dedication.

Check us out at www.lodestoneco.com

Description

Lodestone is looking for self-motivated people with close attention to detail to join our Data Quality Analytics team. As a Data Quality Analyst on the integrity team, you will play a key role working with Product, Program, and Operations teams to drive key Quality initiatives. You will be responsible to detect online hate speech, adult content, and spam to improve safety on the platform. In addition, you will also be responsible for providing thought leadership and operational rigor to improve data quality in order and enhance the product experience for users worldwide.

This is a long-term, and full-time position.

Responsibilities:
Conduct large scale reviews of content to determine the quality and importance of data
Become a subject matter expert and thought leader on content
Leverage policies, and more importantly, your own intuition to provide final authoritative decisions
Work in a highly collaborative team as the last line of defense to improve data quality
Minimum Qualifications:
Fluency in Spanish
Ability to follow instructions and guidelines in a detail oriented fashion
Great communication and collaboration skillls and prior experience working with cross-functional teams
Ability to manage time effectively and prioritize issues while maintaining the level of quality and efficiency
Self-motivated and able to manage workload independently
Preferred Qualifications:
Willing to pick up side projects relating to the field
BA/BS in a critical thinking, quantitative field such as business, economics, engineering, math (or related field)
Found the typo in this job description and included it in your application
Experience in data analytics,Minimum qualifications:
Bachelor’s degree in Statistics/Biostatistics, Operations Research, Physics, Mathematics, Computer Science or equivalent practical experience.
7 years of experience in data analysis in a business context.
5 years of experience in advanced data modeling/SQL databases and forecasting.
Preferred qualifications:
3 years of experience with Java script, Python or R.
5 years of experience with utilizing multiple forecasting tools and software, with the ability to manually produce the same results.
Ability to craft engaging and compelling narratives in verbal and written communications for customers (including executive stakeholders) reflecting a nuanced understanding of diverse audiences.
About the job


At Google, data drives all of our decision-making, and our HR organization is no exception. The People Analytics team acts as an internal innovation lab, using analytical approaches to make sure Google continues to be a great place to work. The team provides critical support to the business around issues of organizational health and is responsible for not just taking the pulse of our Googlers, but harnessing Googler feedback to drive change for the better. As an analyst you'll be detail-oriented and conscientious, analytical and curious. You're a strong problem-solver, who uses both quantitative and qualitative methods to get things done. And on top of it all, you're someone who wonders "What if?" and then seeks out the solution.

Our team makes it easy for Google managers to engage with the contingent workforce, providing training, standards and guidelines to increase business value and minimize Google’s risk. We provide processes, tools, know-how, data and insights to support Googlers through the lifecycle of contingent workforce engagements, so our businesses can make informed decisions.

As a Senior Global Data Analyst, on the Extended Workforce Solutions team, you will use data to inform business and operational decisions across the organization. Using your technical skills, business acumen and creativity, you will develop data reports and visualizations to deliver insights to support the decision making process within different teams at Google. You’ll be involved from data analysis to design through to delivery, ensuring that the reports are delivering high-quality and relevant data so our businesses and operations can grow efficiently with minimum risks.

Great just isn't good enough for our People Operations team (you probably know us better as "Human Resources"). Made up of equal parts HR professionals, former consultants, and analysts, we're the advocates of Google's colorful culture. In People Ops, we "find them, grow them, and keep them". We bring the world's most innovative people to Google and provide the programs that help them thrive. Whether recruiting the next Googler, refining our core programs, developing talent, or simply looking for ways to inject some more fun into the lives of our Googlers, we bring a data-driven approach that is reinventing the human resources field.
Responsibilities
Work on data modeling, metric development, data prototyping, and insight generation using advanced business intelligence techniques.
Drive data governance to ensure data integrity between different databases, applying data health and quality framework to proactively fix or clean existing discrepancies.
Work with business and operations teams to identify ways to improve operational and cost efficiency and mitigate risks.
Manage data visualization for the management and operations dashboards, presenting in a clear and compelling manner for multiple levels in an organization
Manage an offshore vendor operation that supports our data reporting and visualization

Google is proud to be an equal opportunity workplace and is an affirmative action employer. We are committed to equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, gender identity or Veteran status. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. See also Google's EEO Policy and EEO is the Law. If you have a disability or special need that requires accommodation, please let us know by completing this form.,Global Payment Operations organization is hiring a Recon Ops Data Analyst in Austin TX, who will be responsible for day-to-day reconciliation, data analysis and reporting of payment transactions processed through our system and the related general ledger accounts. You will partner closely with our Controlling, Accounting, Payments product and Payments operations Team etc. The ideal candidate will be self-motivated, process-oriented, works effectively with cross functional teams, in addition to strong written and verbal communication skills.

Job Responsibilities:
Reconciles variances by identifying patterns in complex data sets
Works with accounting and product on key performance metrics, reports and analytics related to reconciliation
Manages daily, weekly and monthly reporting for review with Accounting team
Develops standardized reporting packages, and delivers ad-hoc reporting/analysis required to support reconciliation procedures
Works with large volumes of data for extraction and transformation leveraging eBays massive and rich databases
Analyze current manual process surrounding Operations for optimization opportunities.
Designs optimal data architecture for data management and high performance.
Designs and execute reports to measure success and performance of business initiatives.
Automates data driven system controls for Operational procedures
Performs data modeling, documents and presents analysis
Job Requirements
Advanced SQL knowledge
General Ledger and Payments Industry Experience
Experienced in data mining and analysis
Expertise in deriving and building Metrics to help quantify Business Processes.
Ability to work with various stakeholders to understand and build project requirements.
Understands SOX compliant processes and builds accordingly.
Experienced in Agile environment.
Problem solving approach with great verbal and presentation skills
SAS, Python, Hadoop experience is a plus
Master+ 3 Years or Bachelors+ 5 Years
This website uses cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to browse the site, you agree to our use of cookies

View our privacy policy

View our accessibility info

eBay Inc. is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran status, and disability, or other legally protected status. If you are unable to submit an application because of incompatible assistive technology or a disability, please contact us at talent@ebay.com. We will make every effort to respond to your request for disability assistance as soon as possible.

For more information see:

EEO is the Law Poster

EEO is the Law Poster Supplement,The Senior Claims Data Analyst conducts statistical research and analysis for select PRM clients and provides recommendations to client teams and clients. The Senior Claims Data Analyst also serves as a technical leader within the team and works closely with the Provider Strategist in leveraging claims and other data assets to solve business problems and seek out opportunities.

What you will do:
Identifies data needs of PRM customers and determines appropriate methods for researching and collecting data
Conducts research in collaboration with the Provider Strategist and the DCD in support of customers' needs
Gather requirements for client projects and make recommendations based on best practices
Validates quality and integrity of new and existing data sources
Reviews and documents data analysis methodology
Conducts analysis and confirms results
Documents quality assurance process and any variations in findings
Partners with Data Science and other resources to gather data and specifications
Documents and communicates findings and insights to business unit leaders and/or clients
Develops analytic packages for recurring client business problems that are scalable and repeatable
Primary point of contact for presenting results to the client. Engages the audience by contextualizing the data in an understandable way.
Works to make complex, data-heavy research clear and understandable to non-technical audiences.
Reports on business unit metrics and/or key performance indicators
Assists in the development of recommendations, communications, process improvements, etc. based on findings and insights
Serves as a subject matter expert in claims data and analysis and serves as a mentor to other analysts and other team members.
Conducts quality assurance for Data Analysts to ensure accuracy and validity of research and analysis
What you will bring:
Bachelor's degree in Business, Analytics, or equivalent experience
3+ years' experience analyzing claims data
Advanced with SQL coding and Excel with pivot tables and formulas
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau
5+ years' experience in data analytics
Ability to develop and apply data modeling methodologies and assess and address data quality concerns
Ability to translate data findings into actionable recommendations and process improvements
Ability to coach and advise co-workers on analytics best practices
Ability to set priorities and manage time to complete tasks and meet deadlines
At Healthgrades, we recognize that our people drive our greatest achievements. We are passionate about maintaining a fulfilling, rewarding and energetic work environment while setting the stage for continued success.
Meaningful Work Connecting millions with their healthcare providers
Changing the Game evolving culture with career advancement opportunities
Community Builders partnering with local charity and wellness initiatives
Robust Perks generous PTO, 401k contributions, tuition assistance, entertainment discounts and more!,Ad Integrity Data Analyst-ATX
AustinOperationsExperienced
Responsibilities
Responsibilities
Drive quantitative analysis projects from start to finish regarding ad integrity issues by developing BI metrics and analytical frameworks and all aspects of data analysis, and distill the complex results into clear and concise insights;
Deliver data support for long term business development plan from both strategic scope and execution aspects with in-depths business analysis, industry studies and market trends;
Design and establish indicator systems for ad integrity of the platform, monitor and optimize risk coverage in each link, measure the performance of ad integrity strategies and facilitate implementation of the analysis.
Qualifications
Qualifications
BA/BS in Math, Economics, Statistics, or other quantitative fields;
2+ years work experience doing quantitative analysis;
Expert experience pulling large and complex data using SQL;
Experience with a data visualization tool (e.g. Tableau);
Excellent verbal and written English communication skills.
Apply
Share to,About TaskRabbit


At TaskRabbit, we want to make your neighborhood a little more familiar. Whether it’s a handyman (or woman!), a housecleaner, moving help or delivery person, we’re imagining a world where everyone will have a go-to team to make everyday life easier.

As a pioneer of the sharing economy, TaskRabbit was founded on the premise of neighbors helping neighbors. Since then, our network has grown to three countries and 45+ cities, yet our core mission of creating a better everyday life for everyday people has remained the same.

Together with IKEA, we’re creating more opportunities for people to earn a consistent, meaningful income on their own terms by building lasting relationships with clients in communities around the world.

We are a group of mission-minded people. Our culture is collaborative, pragmatic, and fast-paced. We’re looking for talented, entrepreneurially-minded and data-driven people who also have a passion for helping people do what they love - and have a ton of fun while they’re at it.

About the Job


The Trust & Safety Team at TaskRabbit is dedicated to building positive and safe experiences for all users in our marketplace community. As the Data Scientist for the Trust & Safety team you will be responsible for creating our Trust and Safety performance data. You’ll bring together data from many different internal and external sources to define success and measure our progress, and you’ll keep the Trust and Safety team and company informed. You’ll have a direct impact on the safety of our community. You’ll create trust analytics to help drive business decisions to increase both retention of our customers and revenue. As a Data Scientist working on Trust & Safety, you will have the opportunity to collaborate with a strong team of data scientists, engineers, product managers, project managers and operation agents to build scalable and robust systems to detect, prevent and mitigate fraud. From marketplace losses to predictive analytics, you’ll have the opportunity to create the metrics and reporting to articulate the Trust and Safety story to the whole organization. You’ll create metrics and real-time Looker dashboards to showcase both our risks and trust building opportunities. Your reports will be the cornerstone to help the Trust and Safety team detect, prevent and mitigate fraud. The ideal candidate will have a background in risk management, trust and safety, payments, two-sided marketplaces, and/or operations, as well as a desire to learn by doing and deep-dive into new problems.

Join us in creating a better everyday life for everyday people.

Responsibilities:
Define and evaluate key metrics. Investigate and document the levers that impact each.
Devise, build and maintain routine reports, dashboards and visualizations to be used across functions.
Investigate fraud trends to recognize patterns, identify root causes and propose actionable solutions as well as drivers of improved trust at key moments in the experience that correlates to improved customer retention and loyalty
Clearly communicate analyses and recommendations to stakeholders to inform decisions throughout the company.
Empower the team to independently answer data questions quickly and easily by building high-quality accessible data sets and training the team to use them.
Perform advanced statistical analysis including research studies and tests in order to identify, [in]validate, and implement policy, process, tool, and program improvements
Build and iterate on decision support models that continuously improve decisions/actions on claims and cases leading to progressively improved customer satisfaction, reduced risk, and higher consistency or even automation.
Qualifications:


4+ years industry experience in a quantitative analysis role
Strong experience with SQL (MySQL, PostgreSQL, etc.)
Demonstrated ability to create metrics and KPIs
Excited about working with large data sets
Ability to identify critical business problems and create analytical/modeling solutions
Ability to translate complex findings and results into a compelling narrative
Background in statistics and experimentation or acquired knowledge in this area.
Ability to communicate clearly and effectively to cross-functional partners of varying technical levels
Desired Skills & Experience
Strong interpersonal and communication skills, with the ability to work effectively with various departments in different time zones.
Ability to handle multiple projects from scoping to execution.
Excellent time-management skills and attention to detail.
Experience in Operations Research, Optimization, or Operational Analysis is a plus
Adapts well to a fast-paced working environment.
Experience with Looker, Tableau, or similar tool is a plus.
Experience with ZenDesk, identity verification and fraud tools a plus.
Professional, positive, and approachable attitude.
You’ll love working here because:


The People. You will be surrounded by some of the most talented, supportive, smart, and kind leaders and teams -- people you can be proud to work with!
The Values.
Care Deeply. We take time to be present and partner with our team and communities.
Level Up. We navigate through ambiguity and go the extra mile.
Be A Better Neighbor. We build a diverse and sustainable community and encourage all voices.
Lead The Future Together. We value entrepreneurship and inspire by action.
The diverse culture. We believe that we make better decisions when our workforce reflects the diversity of the communities in which we operate. Women make up more than half of our team and leadership, and we strive to recruit and retain employees from all over the world.
The perks. TaskRabbit offers comprehensive medical benefits, generous vacation and holiday time off, commuter benefits, learning and development opportunities, career development trainings, monthly TaskRabbit product stipends, IKEA discounts, free lunch, weekly meditations, charity events, and a dog-friendly office.
Company Overview:


TaskRabbit is a task management network that conveniently connects people with Taskers to handle everyday home to-do’s, such as furniture assembly, handyman work, moving help, and much more. Acquired by IKEA Group - the world’s largest furniture retailer - in 2017, TaskRabbit operates in the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada and is expanding its global reach rapidly.

As a pioneer of the sharing economy, TaskRabbit was founded in 2008 on the premise of neighbors helping neighbors. Since then, our network has grown to three countries, 45 cities and over 140,000 Taskers, yet our core mission has remained the same. We want to make everyday life easier for everyday people. And by doing that, we can make your neighborhood a little more familiar.

In 2017, TaskRabbit launched TaskRabbit for Good (TR4G), which connects neighbors to build sustainable and compassionate communities. TaskRabbit for Good was created to make it easier for neighbors to give back locally and make a positive impact in communities around the world. TaskRabbit donates a portion of its service fee from all TR4G initiatives to best-in-class local non-profit organizations tackling social and environmental challenges.

TaskRabbit’s headquarters is located in the heart of San Francisco, with two other offices in Austin and London.

Equal Opportunity Employer


TaskRabbit is an equal opportunity employer and values diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military/veteran status, or disability status. TaskRabbit is committed to working with and providing reasonable accommodation to applicants with physical and mental disabilities.

TaskRabbit will consider for employment all qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with applicable law.,Facebook's mission is to give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together. Through our family of apps and services, we're building a different kind of company that connects billions of people around the world, gives them ways to share what matters most to them, and helps bring people closer together. Whether we're creating new products or helping a small business expand its reach, people at Facebook are builders at heart. Our global teams are constantly iterating, solving problems, and working together to empower people around the world to build community and connect in meaningful ways. Together, we can help people build stronger communities - we're just getting started.The Facebook Law Enforcement Response Team is seeking a motivated and solutions-oriented Data Analyst. The Data Analyst will be responsible for delivering metrics, building tools and dashboards, and generally supporting global operations. Through this role, the Data Analyst will also work with a wide array of cross-functional partners to drive process improvements and help scale our operations through automation, optimizations, and analyses.

This position is full-time and is based in our Austin office.

Responsibilities:

Understand and utilize our diverse datasets to provide cross-functional partners with metrics, trends, data visualizations, and actionable insights
Build and maintain reports, dashboards, and data pipelines
Address data integrity issues and work to solve root cause process or systems issues by partnering with other data teams across the broader Legal organization
Respond to requests related to LERT data with minimal guidance or oversight
Work with project managers to help drive projects and process improvements with data analysis
Build out documentation related to our internal tables, dashboards, tools, and code-base
Mininum Qualifications:

Bachelors degree in a field that emphasizes data analysis and visualization (e.g., computer science, engineering, social sciences, physical sciences, math, statistics), or equivalent work experience
1+ years professional experience
Proficiency in Microsoft Excel, SQL, and Tableau
Experience processing and analyzing large datasets
Adept at creating ad hoc queries to answer unique questions from a diverse set of stakeholders
Demonstrated data visualization skills with an intuitive knowledge of data storytelling
Demonstrated communication skills
Experience working as part of a team and collaborating with cross-functional partners
Preferred Qualifications:

Experience with Python and R
3+ years professional experience
Facebook is proud to be an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender status, sexual stereotypes, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics. We also consider qualified applicants with criminal histories, consistent with applicable federal, state and local law.

Facebook is committed to providing reasonable accommodations for candidates with disabilities in our recruiting process. If you need any assistance or accommodations due to a disability, please let us know at accommodations-ext@fb.com.,Healthgrades is focused on providing trusted information that helps consumers and providers make meaningful connections. As a Data Quality Analyst, you will be helping build the future of Healthgrades' enterprise data solutions, enabling health systems, hospitals and providers to better reach those consumers who are seeking care. In this hands on role, you will manage your own workload, while also leading a team of skilled and dedicated engineers.

The Healthgrades enterprise data platform will enable health systems to create a holistic patient view, eliminate data silos, and improve patient experience. This enterprise platform will bring together once disparate data into a single platform, breaking down data silos and making data more useful across an entire organization. The Healthgrades data platform will also serve as the underlying data management solution for powering Healthgrades CRM and other customer experience execution systems while enabling health systems to reach beyond traditional efforts to improve and manage patient experience and patient engagement.

This is an exciting opportunity to work on word-class products, designed from scratch, and using the latest technology stacks.

What You Will Do:
Work with Development, Test, and Product Management Teams to design and implement manual and automated validation strategies for functional, integrated end-to-end testing
Identify gaps in the quality assurance and testing processes, generate solutions, and drive iterative improvement
Review product requirements, specifications, and technical design documents
Participate in estimating, prioritizing, planning, and coordinating testing activities
Assist in designing, developing, and executing automation scripts, as well as identifying, documenting, and tracking bugs
Assist in performing regression testing when bugs are resolved
Help ensure compliance with client, agency, and company guidelines and standards
What You Will Bring:
3+ years of experience working with large scale Enterprise Data Warehouse, Data Integration, Data Migration, and/or Data Pipeline & Reporting, and upgrading projects in legacy or cloud based architecture
Well-versed in creating Test Plans, Test Reporting, and stakeholder management
Strong SQL experience, with an understanding of tools such as Alteryx, Talend, Snowflake, Stitch, and Reltio
Experience developing data validation frameworks from scratch and/or using data validation tools
Basic understanding of master data management and Data Pipeline & Reporting concepts
Experience conducting and running data defect triage meetings with various cross-functional teams
Bonus: experience creating Test Automation scripts/frameworks, Salesforce experience, and healthcare industry experience
Why Healthgrades?

At Healthgrades, we recognize that our people drive our greatest achievements. We are passionate about maintaining a fulfilling, rewarding and high-energy work environment while setting the stage for your continued success.
Meaningful Work empowering consumers with data to make the right healthcare decisions for themselves and their families
Changing the Game dynamic culture with career advancement opportunities
Community Builders partners of local charity organizations, Go-Green efforts and wellness initiatives
Robust Perks generous PTO, inclusive healthcare, learning & development programs, 401k contributions, tuition repayment, family planning resources & more!,Company LawnStarter
Location Austin, TX
Job Type Permanent
Description

LawnStarter is the nation's leading on-demand platform for lawn care, providing over 120 US markets with an easy, Uber-like lawn care experience. We've recently raised a substantial round of growth equity to become the digital one-stop-shop for all outdoor home services.
LawnStarter is looking for an incredibly talented lead data analyst who can help surface powerful insights from the data rich LawnStarter platform. [.]
Query data to conduct analysis of business and model metrics, build tools and queries for others to use, and establish controls around data quality. [.]
Communicate effectively...

Today from:,About usAt Cloudflare, we have our eyes set on an ambitious goal: to help build a better Internet. Today, Cloudflare runs one of the world's largest distributed networks that powers more than 10 trillion requests per month, which is nearly 10 percent of all Internet requests worldwide. Cloudflare protects and accelerates any Internet application online without adding hardware, installing software, or changing a line of code.Our customers range from Fortune 500 companies and nonprofits to small businesses and budding entrepreneurs. We are working to create a faster, more secure, and more reliable experience for anyone online and given the scale at which we operate, our mission is big. Our team is hard at work shaping the future of the Internet by solving some of its toughest challenges.We realize people do not fit into neat boxes. We are looking for curious and empathetic individuals who are committed to developing themselves and learning new skills, and we are ready to help you do that. We cannot complete our mission without building a diverse and inclusive team. We hire the best people based on an evaluation of their potential and support them throughout their time at Cloudflare. Come join us!About the departmentCloudflare is looking to build and grow our data analytics/business intelligence team that will be responsible for building a large-scale enterprise modern data lake and EDW that combines massive petabyte scale traffic logs with data from various business systems supporting product, marketing, customer support, sales, finance etc. and enabling easier consumption of that data using tools to drive standard reporting, adhoc/exploratory analytics and advanced insights using data science models.About the roleAs part of this initiative, we are looking for a strong data analyst to come join Cloudflare and help us drive analytic insights and best practices at scale from the ground up. Success in this role comes from marrying a strong data background with acute product and business acumen to deliver highly strategic and compelling insights that accelerate our business growth and influence our product decisions within Cloudflare.What we look for: Data analysis, Business Analysis, Storytelling, Strong Business & Product Acumen, Cross-functional Collaboration, Creative Problem Solving, AgileWhat you'll do* Partner and align with business leaders, stakeholders, product managers and internal teams to understand the requirements and technical specifications and address complex business questions in a globally distributed environment.* Understand data landscape i.e tooling, tech stack, source systems etc. and work closely with the data Engineering team to improve the data collection and quality.* Understand business/product strategy and high-level roadmap and align analysis efforts to enable them with data insights and help achieve their strategic goals.* Strong audience focused presentation and storytelling skills focused on key takeaways and recommendations in a crisp and concise manner.* Ability to define and spot macro and micro levels trends with statistical significance on a regular basis and understand key drivers driving those trends.Examples of desirable skills, knowledge and experience* Bachelor's or Master's Degree in Computer Science or Engineering or related experience required.* 7+ years of data analyst experience with 3+ years of proven industry experience in a large scale environment (PBs scale, globally distributed teams).* Proven experience coaching and mentoring early talent to mid-level data analysts* Proven results oriented analysis that helped support positive change in the business strategy* 2+ years experience with a fast-growing SaaS business based company is preferred.* Strong experience in SQL, Tableau (or similar), BigQuery (or any other Big data/Cloud equivalent). Experience with Python and/or R is a plus* Capable of working closely with business including but not limited to, Engineering, Sales, Marketing and Product teams to ensure data initiatives are aligned with business needs and is of high quality.What Makes Cloudflare Special?We're not just a highly ambitious, large-scale technology company. We're a highly ambitious, large-scale technology company with a soul. Fundamental to our mission to help build a better Internet is protecting the free and open Internet.Project Galileo: We equip politically and artistically important organizations and journalists with powerful tools to defend themselves against attacks that would otherwise censor their work, technology already used by Cloudflare's enterprise customers--at no cost.Athenian Project: We created Athenian Project to ensure that state and local governments have the highest level of protection and reliability for free, so that their constituents have access to election information and voter registration.Path Forward Partnership: Since 2016, we have partnered with Path Forward, a nonprofit organization, to create 16-week positions for mid-career professionals who want to get back to the workplace after taking time off to care for a child, parent, or loved one.1.1.1.1: We released 1.1.1.1 to help fix the foundation of the Internet by building a faster, more secure and privacy-centric public DNS resolver. This is available publicly for everyone to use - it is the first consumer-focused service Cloudflare has ever released. Here's the deal - we don't store client IP addresses never, ever. We will continue to abide by our privacy policy and ensure that no user data is sold to advertisers or used to target consumers.Sound like something you'd like to be a part of? We'd love to hear from you!Cloudflare is proud to be an equal opportunity employer. We are committed to providing equal employment opportunity for all people and place great value in both diversity and inclusiveness. All qualified applicants will be considered for employment without regard to their, or any other person's, perceived or actual race, color, religion, sex, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, age, physical or mental disability, medical condition, family care status, or any other basis protected by law. We are an AA/Veterans/Disabled Employer.Cloudflare provides reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with disabilities. Please tell us if you require a reasonable accommodation to apply for a job. Examples of reasonable accommodations include, but are not limited to, changing the application process, providing documents in an alternate format, using a sign language interpreter, or using specialized equipment. If you require a reasonable accommodation to apply for a job, please contact us via e-mail at hr@cloudflare.com or via mail at 101 Townsend St. San Francisco, CA 94107.,About us


Life360 brings families closer with smart tools designed to protect and connect the people who matter most.

Known for first-to-market solutions for modern family challenges, Life360 recently reached #1 in Apple's US App Store's list of free social networking apps. Nearly 1 in 10 US families with kids use Life360 an average of 12 times a day, and global membership is growing exponentially, with over 28 million active users in over 140 countries as of March 31, 2020 making Life360 the largest mobile service for families in the world.

This reach gives us the opportunity to do unprecedented good for families through our valued core offerings: advanced location sharing, private messaging, driver monitoring, help alerts, 24/7 roadside assistance, and Crash Detection with emergency response. On average we respond to 1,000 roadside assists and dispatch 200+ ambulances each month to those in need.

Offering both free and paid memberships. In addition, the company has raised over $200 million in equity financing, and recently completed an IPO on the ASX exchange giving our employees the liquidity of a public company with the upside of a private growth stage business.

Life360's rapidly growing team of 150+ employees is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in San Diego, and Las Vegas.

About the Job:

Data plays a crucial role in Life360's growth by driving smarter decisions, improving operations, and creating higher value user experiences. As an analytics team, we partner with a wide variety of cross-functional partners to apply data insights against strategic initiatives. "Know Our Users" is a Life360 core value and we're looking for analytics professionals who are passionate about leveraging user data to create value for Life360 families.

You'll be working in a dynamic growth environment, leading efforts to better understand the business, the product, and the customer. Life360 has one of the most interesting datasets in the world: location, driving, product usage, and purchasing behavioral data - all centered around who matters most, the family. If you have a passion for making an impact and working on products that help millions of families around the world, then this is the right place for you.

Responsibilities:

Analytics team members work closely with specific strategic teams but also have opportunities to work on company-wide initiatives. This person is expected to focus on that particular area but also generalize their skills towards other parts of the business with a variety of projects.

In this role, we are looking for someone to partner with the Revenue team in developing actionable insights from both product and financial perspectives. Common projects range from financial disclosure reports that tell Life360's growth story to conducting deep-dive analyses into identifying opportunities for subscription growth. Ultimately, you will be tasked with finding data insights that deliver business value.

These are some typical responsibilities:
Leverage data to understand the Life360 family and their product usage, developing insights that apply to product, marketing, and business strategy.
Partner with executives, product managers, engineers, marketers, designers to translate data insights into smarter decisions and applications.
Establish and manage KPIs that measure the health of the business, product performance, and customer experience quality.
Build dashboards and reporting processes to monitor business and product trends.
Develop frameworks, tools, and best practices to apply data insights towards business questions.
Conduct analyses and build models that identify opportunities and drive growth.
Design and analyze experiments, communicate results, and drive decisions.
Potential projects may include forecasting business performance, developing family driving profiles, and predicting customer lifetime value.
Minimum Qualifications:

We are looking for candidates with a diverse background that will compliment the skills and backgrounds of the current team. If you don't fit all the criteria below please apply anyway as this list is more of a preference rather than a rule. Our priority is for a well rounded team that delivers results.
We are looking for candidates who have had previous experience on analytics teams and are willing to help coach and mentor colleagues on best data practices.
5+ years is preferred.
Degree in a quantitative field like statistics, economics, applied math, operations research, or engineering, finance, business intelligence. Advanced degrees are preferred.
Experience in product analytics related to mobile apps
SQL expertise - able to write structured and efficient queries on large datasets.
Experience in scripting languages, like analysis and visualization libraries in Python or R.
Strong verbal/written communication skills and the ability to collaborate with cross-functional partners to build the business.
Proficiency in building data visualizations and interactive dashboards with tools like Tableau.
Experience designing and evaluating experiments to draw inferential recommendations.
Curiosity to learn about new topics and uncover hidden insights.
Perks
Fridays are Work From Home days at Life360
Competitive pay and benefits
Free snacks, drinks (three ways to brew your favorite cup of coffee), and food in the office
Catered lunches throughout the week
Health, dental and vision insurance plans
401k plan
$200/month Quality of Life perk
A great office with plenty of light in the heart of the SOMA district in beautiful San Francisco
Whatever makes you stronger makes us stronger. We buy you the things you need to improve yourself and get your job done.
This position is located in San Francisco, CA. It is not a remote role.,PubNub powers apps that bring people together in realtime for remote work, play, learning, and health. Thousands of companies use PubNub's Realtime Communication Platform and its APIs as the foundation for online chat, live events, geolocation, remote control, and live updates, at massive global scale. Since 2010, PubNub has invested in the tools and global infrastructure required to serve customers like Atlassian, Hasbro, Peloton, and RingCentral, delivering SOC 2 Type 2 security and reliability while meeting regulatory needs like HIPAA and GDPR. PubNub has raised over $70M from notable investors like Sapphire, Scale, Relay, Cisco, Bosch, Ericsson, and HPE.

PubNub is proud to be an EEO employer.

About The Role

PubNub is looking for a senior analyst to join the Data and Analytics team. Your mission is to help the team make informed decisions that help PubNub grow efficiently. As PubNub's first analyst, you'll get the opportunity to shape the future of PubNub's analytics, and have a lot of room for growth in your career. You'll bring clarity and structure to answer high impact questions for the business. You'll play a pivotal role leading measurement and insights, leveraging SQL query writing, data analysis, Google Analytics and data synthesis to better inform the team on how to drive results. You'll discover areas of opportunity that will drive the data and analytical roadmap.

Responsibilities
Collaborate closely with Sales, Marketing, Product and Engineering stakeholders to define data requirements and ensure data integrity
Provide analytical and data solutions to Marketing, Sales, Support and Product
Design data pipeline work and build dashboards to monitor experiments and key business metrics
Measure the effectiveness (ROI) of marketing campaigns and channels
Partner with Demand Generation team to deliver continuous conversion improvement on paid and organic channels
Focus on data, experimentation, testing, and analytics to uncover key business insights and opportunities
Present strategies, initiatives, and results to the broader cross-functional growth team
Requirements
Bachelor's degree required. 3-6 years professional experience in a highly analytical, data-intensive and strategic role
Must be advanced in SQL, Google Analytics, Excel and at least one data visualization tool (Mode / Tableau / Looker, etc.)
Demonstrated ability to leverage analytics and work with complex datasets to understand performance, optimize campaigns, drive decision-making, and measure outcomes
Able to clearly communicate key insights in a concise manner and anticipate questions in advance
Positive, upbeat attitude
Relentless focus on improvement
Open to locations in Western, USA
Bonus Points
Background in B2B SaaS marketing
Experience with A/B Testing
Experience with data analysis packages in R, Python, etc.
ETL pipeline development experience,Since 2005, BOLD has established itself as a job seeker's ally. Unlike our competitors that specialize in posting jobs for employers, BOLD's focus steadfastly remains on the job seeker. Our top-rated tools offer job seekers of every walk of life the help they need to get the jobs they want.A profitable, mature startup, BOLD walks with the job seeker through every phase of the job search process. Our award-winning resume and cover letter builders have helped millions of job seekers in more than 180 countries create the application materials they need to succeed.BOLD's brands have a presence across the globe and BOLD is continuing to build its international offerings and serve millions of job seekers.Department SummaryThis role is on our Analytics team. This team partners with Product, Marketing, and Finance to produce world-class analysis and provide recommendations that improve our products and increase customer engagement.Position SummaryBOLD is looking for an enthusiastic PRODUCT DATA ANALYST to join our team. You will provide critical insights to business partners and strategic support to the executive team. You will also have your fingers on the pulse of the business and develop metrics and reporting to keep the organization informed. Through your high-quality analysis and attention to detail, you will be the go-to person for product performance and insights. The ideal candidate is highly motivated and will use their technical skills and business acumen to quickly make an impact!Position Responsibilities* Conduct in-depth analysis to uncover opportunities for improving our products.* Work closely with business partners to extract meaningful insights using a variety of data sources: relational databases, front-end analytics tools, clickstream data, etc.* Present insights and recommendations to executive leadership using high quality visualizations and concise messaging.* Design and analyze A/B tests to drive KPI improvements.* Build models to predict customer behavior and better understand the drivers of customer engagement and retention.* Develop dashboards to inform business decisions with an emphasis on automation and scalability.* Collaborate with Engineering to advance data infrastructure and governance.Required Qualifications* Minimum 2 years as an individual contributor performing quantitative analysis, preferably for an internet or technology company.* Bachelors or Master's degree in Math, Engineering, Statistics or other quantitative field, with a track record of academic excellence.* Self-starter with a desire to learn and the ability to rapidly understand the business and its drivers.* Ability to handle multiple projects and meet deadlines in a fast-paced environment.* Ability to write complex SQL queries to extract data from a variety of internal sources.* Solid understanding of Statistics with ability to explain statistical concepts to non-technical audiences.* Proficiency with BI tools such as Tableau, Looker, or equivalent.Desired Qualifications* Knowledge of programming languages such as Python/R preferred.* Experience with Google Analytics, MixPanel or other front-end analytical platforms a plus.ABOUT BOLD* BOLD is a fast-paced, innovative company full of smart, committed people who are passionate about our products and love helping people find the career of their dreams. We balance work and fun while continuing to build a successful, fast-growing company that is changing the way people get jobs.* Our vision is to revolutionize the online career world by creating transformational products that help people find the careers they love and reach their full potential.* BOLD is an equal opportunity employer. All persons will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, pregnancy, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, age, legally protected physical or mental disability, covered veteran status, status in the U.S. uniformed services, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital status, genetic information or membership in any other legally protected category.* Qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records will be considered for the position in accordance with San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance.,Location: San Francisco, CA


Coinbase has built the world's leading compliant cryptocurrency platform serving over 30 million accounts in more than 100 countries. With multiple successful products, and our vocal advocacy for blockchain technology, we have played a major part in mainstream awareness and adoption of cryptocurrency. We are proud to offer an entire suite of products that are helping build the cryptoeconomy, and increase economic freedom around the world.

There are a few things we look for across all hires we make at Coinbase, regardless of role or team. First, we assess whether a candidate demonstrates our values: Clear Communication, Positive Energy, Efficient Execution, and Continuous Learning. Second, we look for signals that a candidate will thrive in a culture like ours, where we default to trust, embrace feedback, disrupt ourselves, and expect sustained high performance because we play as a championship team. Finally, we seek people with the desire and capacity to build and share expertise in the frontier technologies of crypto and blockchain, in whatever way is most relevant to their role.

Read more about our values and culture here.

As a Operations Data Analyst, you'll be the analytical point on the team to help support various operational initiatives by transforming support data into valuable business insights and help shape our projects to deliver maximum impact. You will have the opportunity to heavily influence strategy, planning, and execution.

What you'll be doing (ie. job duties):
Work closely with the Customer Experience (CX) Operations team to operate more effectively, create and track metrics across our operations, and share informative actionable insights
Partner with CX Leadership and cross-functional partners to find opportunities to increase operational trackability, efficiency, and scale our business effectively
Leverage metrics to drive insights and influence business decisions
Develop a strong prioritization framework to ensure team is focused on highest-value initiatives
Ability to frame and break down complex business problems into key components and recommend practical solutions
Monitor key performance metrics and use results to help the team be more effective in carrying out their mission of providing high-quality support
Build a collaborative team environment that fosters efficient execution, innovation, and continuous improvement
Develop and support the analytical technologies that give our team timely, flexible, and structured access to their data
What we look for in you (ie. job requirements):
Motivated by Coinbase's mission and creating a seamless support experience for our global customer base.
Minimum 5 years of experience in an analyst function (e.g. operations, finance, business analytics, etc.)
Expert-level Excel user (Vlookups, pivots, macros, etc.), strong SQL, Looker experience a plus
Experience working in customer support operations; experience working in (or doing analysis for) Support departments a plus
Fantastic communication skills in order to operate across multiple departments and stakeholders.
Flexible and adaptable to meeting the evolving needs of a high-growth and fast paced organization.
Must be able to read, write and speak in English.
Coinbase is committed to diversity in its workforce and is proud to be an equal opportunity employer and to review all of our job postings to minimize biased language. Coinbase does not make hiring or employment decisions on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, gender, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, marital status, pregnancy, sex, gender expression or identity, sexual orientation, citizenship, or any other basis protected by applicable local, state or federal law. Coinbase will also consider for employment qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records in a manner consistent with San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance and similar local laws.

Global Data Privacy Notice for Job Candidates and Applicants

Depending on your location, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) may regulate the way we manage the data of job applicants. Our full notice outlining how your data will be processed as part of the application procedure for application locations is available here: Ireland/EU, United Kingdom, and California. By submitting your application, you are agreeing to our use and processing of your data as required.,About Wilbur Labs
Wilbur Labs is a startup studio that is building a portfolio of companies at the intersection of marketing and technology. We are founded by a team of ex-Googlers who are reinventing the way companies are built by leveraging data and automation across the entire business lifecycle. Our approach to building businesses eliminates inefficiencies and opens the door to scaling much faster than traditional companies.

Role & Responsibilities
Work closely with various stakeholders to produce data-driven business insights
Own analytics dashboards across the Wilbur Labs portfolio
Design and run A/B tests and other experiments for the companies in the portfolio
Build cutting-edge ML models to solve complex technological problems for the companies in Wilbur Labs portfolio

Minimum Qualifications
Applied experience executing analysis, communicating results and developing metrics that matter
Experience with data tools - SQL, Python; proficiency with spreadsheets
Track record of building and launching Machine Learning models as part of working products
Solid understanding of the A/B testing and experiment design both in theory and in practice
Comfortable and effective at juggling multiple projects and priorities simultaneously in a fast paced work environment
Ability to communicate clearly in reports and documentation
Preferably be located in or willing to relocate to the San Francisco Bay Area

BONUS POINTS
2+ years experience working in an analytics organization or related field
A solid math and statistics background
A Masters degree (or higher) in a technical field (Data Science, Statistics, Operations Research, Math, Computer Science, Physics)
Understanding of BI/analytics tools (Tableau, Power BI, Looker, Sigma etc.)
Knowledge of experimentation platforms (Optimizely, VWO, Omniconvert etc.)
Experience with Google Cloud (BigQuery, Data Studio),At Priceonomics, our core skill is making data interesting. How do you find a great idea in a dense data set? What’s the best way to present it? How do you create a story where the data is the main character?

As it turns out, there is commercial value in telling a story focused on data. Companies have lots of data, but they have less experience in using it to tell stories that will spread on the Internet.

That’s a shame, because when it comes to content marketing, people seem to actually like it when companies share exciting insights from their data. When you approach a company’s data like a journalist telling a story or an analyst uncovering a trend—rather than a marketer engaging in pure self-promotion—you can produce work that will get your friends talking and gain the attention of publications like The Economist and the New York Times.

In December, we launched The Priceonomics Data Studio, a content marketing agency that helps companies turn their data into stories that spread. Although our data studio is only a few months old, we now work with dozens of companies, including Fortune 100 corporations, “unicorn” tech companies, and small startups. Half our customers are B2B (they sell to businesses) and half are B2C (they sell to consumers).

Working with companies, we’ve told data-driven stories on topics ranging from the driving preferences of Democrats and Republicans to the average size of a bridal party in weddings across the country.

To grow the Priceonomics Data Studio and create more interesting data stories, we need help meeting the demand. Maybe you are interested?

We are looking for people who are comfortable working with data to help us turn data into content for our clients. We’ll send you a raw data file, some thoughts on the topic, and a template for how the charts should look. You’ll create an awesome data-driven article with our help.

For each piece, we’ll pay you (generally around $1000). We’re looking to work closely with people who can work quickly with data, have a knack for visualization, and can complete projects like this in approximately 10 hours or less. If you’re good at this and enjoy it, you can work on nearly as many of these projects with us as you like.

So, are you interested? We need two things from you. First, an honest assessment of if you can do this sort of work. Second, the answer to a very quick “data puzzle.”

1. A quick puzzle

Tell us the median price of booking a room in each of the top 100 cities in this data set.

You can download the data here and read the “backstory” here. This is a fictional data set, but it’s very typical of the kind of raw information we analyze for a Priceonomics Blog post or a project in our Data Studio.

More specifically, send us back a table with a list of the median price in each city, ranked from most to least expensive. Restrict your analysis to just to the "top 100" cities that have the most units on the market.

You can also briefly describe how you solved it, any assumptions you made, or even send us the work. If some parts of the results look odd, you can propose how you’d improve the analysis given the data available in the file.

This puzzle should be a relatively quick task—not something that requires lots of brute force. If you need a hint on how to do this, here’s one.

2. An honest assessment

Companies give us data, and we turn it into interesting stories. Here are some examples of how we used data about driving preferences, bridal parties, and consumer spending habits at the grocery story. Can you do this sort of work?

It requires making maps and tables—and telling a story. It also requires fluency in Excel or a difference analysis program like R. If you know how to use Excel, can you perform: a pivot table, a vlookup, an index-match, an array, and the mid function?

Maybe you’re a PhD student, a data journalist at a blog, or a recovering management consultant who wants to work with interesting data and make some extra money.

Whatever your situation, tell us about your background and why you can do this sort of work.

To apply to become part of this program, just send an email to jobs@priceonomics.com with the answers to these questions. Feel free to let us know anything else we should know about you in the email.

We love a good story about data, and we look forward to creating some with you.

***

We’re also hiring a full time Writer/Analyst to join us in San Francisco. You’ll work at crunching data and telling stories for our customers and on the Priceonomics Blog. If you’re interested in a full time job, complete the puzzle and then send us a message at jobs@priceonomics.com.

***,Since 2005, BOLD has established itself as a job seeker's ally. Unlike our competitors that specialize in posting jobs for employers, BOLD's focus steadfastly remains on the job seeker. Our top-rated tools offer job seekers of every walk of life the help they need to get the jobs they want.

A profitable, mature startup, BOLD walks with the job seeker through every phase of the job search process. Our award-winning resume and cover letter builders have helped millions of job seekers in more than 180 countries create the application materials they need to succeed.

BOLD's brands have a presence across the globe and BOLD is continuing to build its international offerings and serve millions of job seekers.

Department Summary

This role is on our Analytics team. This team partners with Product, Marketing, and Finance to produce world-class analysis and provide recommendations that improve our products and increase customer engagement.

Position Summary

BOLD is looking for an enthusiastic PRODUCT DATA ANALYST to join our team. You will provide critical insights to business partners and strategic support to the executive team. You will also have your fingers on the pulse of the business and develop metrics and reporting to keep the organization informed. Through your high-quality analysis and attention to detail, you will be the go-to person for product performance and insights. The ideal candidate is highly motivated and will use their technical skills and business acumen to quickly make an impact!

Position Responsibilities
Conduct in-depth analysis to uncover opportunities for improving our products.
Work closely with business partners to extract meaningful insights using a variety of data sources: relational databases, front-end analytics tools, clickstream data, etc.
Present insights and recommendations to executive leadership using high quality visualizations and concise messaging.
Design and analyze A/B tests to drive KPI improvements.
Build models to predict customer behavior and better understand the drivers of customer engagement and retention.
Develop dashboards to inform business decisions with an emphasis on automation and scalability.
Collaborate with Engineering to advance data infrastructure and governance.
Required Qualifications
Minimum 2 years as an individual contributor performing quantitative analysis, preferably for an internet or technology company.
Bachelors or Master's degree in Math, Engineering, Statistics or other quantitative field, with a track record of academic excellence.
Self-starter with a desire to learn and the ability to rapidly understand the business and its drivers.
Ability to handle multiple projects and meet deadlines in a fast-paced environment.
Ability to write complex SQL queries to extract data from a variety of internal sources.
Solid understanding of Statistics with ability to explain statistical concepts to non-technical audiences.
Proficiency with BI tools such as Tableau, Looker, or equivalent.


Desired Qualifications
Knowledge of programming languages such as Python/R preferred.
Experience with Google Analytics, MixPanel or other front-end analytical platforms a plus.
ABOUT BOLD
BOLD is a fast-paced, innovative company full of smart, committed people who are passionate about our products and love helping people find the career of their dreams. We balance work and fun while continuing to build a successful, fast-growing company that is changing the way people get jobs.
Our vision is to revolutionize the online career world by creating transformational products that help people find the careers they love and reach their full potential.
BOLD is an equal opportunity employer. All persons will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, pregnancy, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, age, legally protected physical or mental disability, covered veteran status, status in the U.S. uniformed services, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital status, genetic information or membership in any other legally protected category.
Qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records will be considered for the position in accordance with San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance.,Who We Are:


Twitter users generate many terabytes of data every day; The TwS analytics team is at the intersection of all this data and strives to make it actionable to all business units within TwS. Analytics team build real-time and offline solutions to make data accessible and reliable -- and then apply them to the most critical and fundamental analytical problems to guide TwS business decisions via observational analyses, trend analyses, modeling, and new measurement strategies.

What You’ll Do:


We are trying to improve Twitter Service. To improve something, we need to be able to measure it. You will enable better measurements and ensure measurement accuracy so that we know where we are doing well and where we want to improve.

You’ll partner with product, technology, and ops leaders to turn business problems into data problems and demonstrate creativity by using existing data to solve those problems. You have at least 8+ years of experience in applied data science and analytics, including hands-on development and deployment of predictive modeling/machine learning models.
Collaborate w/business partners to identify opportunities, understand objectives, and rationalize efforts to support strategic business objectives w/ both short-term and long-term deliveries in an environment with high SLA expectations.
Advanced - SQL , Python (descriptive / predictive models) and Tableau viz. Working knowledge of Hadoop, BigQuery, Presto, Vertica, Excel
Own the end to end data science process, from initiation to deployment, and through ongoing communication and collaboration, sharing of results to partners and leadership.
Drive personalization, real-time decision-making, causal inference, and predictive analytics capabilities through the application of Machine Learning, Deep Learning, NLP, and Simulation in an agile development framework.
Conduct quantitative analysis of experimental, and textual data to generate insights and drive decision making (ANOVA, Regression, Chi-Sq, AB, pre-post etc..)
[Preferred] Ability to write Scalding job for data extraction and aggregation. Working knowledge of Data warehousing principles
Write well documented code that can be shared and used across teams, and can scale to be used in existing products
Soft skills:
Ability to communicate findings clearly to both technical and non-technical audiences and to effectively collaborate within cross-functional teams
We follow agile framework and processes. Hence, cross-functional collaboration, communication skills and a focus on delivering a great user experience are a must
You should be comfortable managing work plans, timelines and milestones
You have a sense of urgency, move quickly and ship things
Bonus Points:
You're experienced in metrics and experiment-driven development
Experience in statistical methodology (multivariate, time-series, experimental design, data mining, etc.)
Industry experience (retail or service is a plus but not a prerequisite)
Note: Potential exposure to sensitive or graphic content, including but not limited to vulgar language, violent threats, pornography, and other graphic images.

You will see a direct link between your work, TwS growth, and user satisfaction.

We are committed to an inclusive and diverse Twitter. Twitter is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate based on race, color, ethnicity, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, age, disability, veteran status, genetic information, marital status or any legally protected status.,About TaskRabbit


At TaskRabbit, we want to make your neighborhood a little more familiar. Whether it's a handyman (or woman!), a housecleaner, moving help or delivery person, we're imagining a world where everyone will have a go-to team to make everyday life easier.

As a pioneer of the sharing economy, TaskRabbit was founded on the premise of neighbors helping neighbors. Since then, our network has grown to three countries and 45+ cities, yet our core mission of creating a better everyday life for everyday people has remained the same.

Together with IKEA, we're creating more opportunities for people to earn a consistent, meaningful income on their own terms by building lasting relationships with clients in communities around the world.

We are a group of mission-minded people. Our culture is collaborative, pragmatic, and fast-paced. We're looking for talented, entrepreneurially-minded and data-driven people who also have a passion for helping people do what they love - and have a ton of fun while they're at it.

About the Job


Data and analytics are the lifeblood of TaskRabbit and we are building a Data Analytics team to provide key insights to drive our business forward.

You will be a member of the Data Group: Data Analytics, Data Science and Data Engineering. We are a force multiplier, owning the data, analysis, and knowledge infrastructure that enables ourselves and our teammates to move faster and smarter.

As a Senior Data Analyst, you will work with cross-functional teams, working closely with business unit managers to analyze their business problems and provide insights and recommendations on potential solutions to test and measure. You will also assist in defining metrics and building dynamic reports that business unit managers can use to track progress towards targets. You will have the opportunity to work hand-in-hand with Marketing, Growth, Operations, and Customer Support teams in order to accelerate growth, optimize performance, and scale efficiently.

As part of the Data Group, you will collaborate with Data Scientists, drawing on their technical skills and expertise. Also, you will work with Data Engineers to ensure that the data platform and infrastructure provides you with the data and tools you need to do your job.

Responsibilities
Translate business problems and requirements into data questions
Develop testable hypotheses, conduct experiments and measure results
Deliver insights to improve business performance and decision-making
Collaborate closely with cross-functional teams including product managers, designers, and engineers
Define key metrics to track product performance
Become a subject-matter expert on marketplace dynamics
Background and Experience


We welcome applicants from a variety of backgrounds and experiences. Below gives you a sense of how we're thinking about what you'll need to be successful in the role.
Bachelor or Master Science degree in Computer Science, Math, Engineering, Operations Research, Statistics or other quantitative fields
4+ years of experience in a data analytics role or equivalent
Strong experience with SQL (MySQL, PostgreSQL, etc.)
Knowledgeable in Python programming
Strong communication skills, both written and oral; comfortable presenting findings and recommendations to decision-makers
Excited about working with large data sets
Experience with Looker, Tableau, or similar tool is a plus
Bonus Points
Agile. Intelligent. Creative. Problem-solver. Startup lover. You like making things happen.
We're looking for people that have a passion for data, technology and problem solving
You're familiar with our product and have some ideas on things you'd want to add or change!
You'll love working here because:


The People. You will be surrounded by some of the most talented, supportive, smart, and kind leaders and teams -- people you can be proud to work with!
The Values.
Care Deeply. We take time to be present and partner with our team and communities.
Level Up. We navigate through ambiguity and go the extra mile.
Be A Better Neighbor. We build a diverse and sustainable community and encourage all voices.
Lead The Future Together. We value entrepreneurship and inspire by action.
The diverse culture. We believe that we make better decisions when our workforce reflects the diversity of the communities in which we operate. Women make up more than half of our team and leadership, and we strive to recruit and retain employees from all over the world.
The perks. TaskRabbit offers comprehensive medical benefits, generous vacation and holiday time off, commuter benefits, learning and development opportunities, career development trainings, monthly TaskRabbit product stipends, IKEA discounts, free lunch, weekly meditations, charity events, and a dog-friendly office.
Company Overview:


TaskRabbit is a task management network that conveniently connects people with Taskers to handle everyday home to-do's, such as furniture assembly, handyman work, moving help, and much more. Acquired by IKEA Group - the world's largest furniture retailer - in 2017, TaskRabbit operates in the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada and is expanding its global reach rapidly.

As a pioneer of the sharing economy, TaskRabbit was founded in 2008 on the premise of neighbors helping neighbors. Since then, our network has grown to three countries, 45 cities and over 140,000 Taskers, yet our core mission has remained the same. We want to make everyday life easier for everyday people. And by doing that, we can make your neighborhood a little more familiar.

In 2017, TaskRabbit launched TaskRabbit for Good (TR4G), which connects neighbors to build sustainable and compassionate communities. TaskRabbit for Good was created to make it easier for neighbors to give back locally and make a positive impact in communities around the world. TaskRabbit donates a portion of its service fee from all TR4G initiatives to best-in-class local non-profit organizations tackling social and environmental challenges.

TaskRabbit's headquarters is located in the heart of San Francisco, with three other offices in New York City, Austin, and London.

Equal Opportunity Employer


TaskRabbit is an equal opportunity employer and values diversity at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, marital status, military/veteran status, or disability status. TaskRabbit is committed to working with and providing reasonable accommodation to applicants with physical and mental disabilities.

TaskRabbit will consider for employment all qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with applicable law.,Sr. Data Analyst - Twitter Service Tech, San Francisco

Do you love protecting platforms from adversarial actors? Are you a data-driven analyst who is willing to dive deep and identify what spammers are up to? Join us in protecting Twitter from various forms of spam and abuse!

Who We Are

The Platform Intelligence Team is responsible for protecting Twitter from platform manipulation and ensuring integrity of accounts through smart intelligence, scaled & automated enforcement, and operational excellence. We focus on combating scaled attack patterns, automation development, and protecting the Twitter brand and user experience by preventing terms of service violations across the Twitter platform.

The Twitter Service organization provides meaningful and effective support and services to the Twitter community. We are on our way to becoming recognized as the best embodiment of a service driven culture, placing customer needs at the center of operations as we actively listen and help. Our mission is to provide customer service so remarkable, it removes any barriers towards participating in the public conversation.

What You’ll Do
Conduct forensic investigation and take action on suspicious accounts that violate our terms of service at scale, including but not limited to spam, abuse, identity, media, etc.
Identify new problems of policy violations on the platform and implement solutions at scale.
Conduct studies to accumulate intelligence on identified networks of spammy or abusive actors;
Rapidly build and launch auto-enforcement rules based on heuristics;
Build simple heuristic rules, advanced statistical models, or machine learning models, to identify opportunities in remediating accounts with spam and abuse activities
Maintain and improve an existing set of rules for automation and generating manual review queues;
Work with XFN partners, to communicate findings and investigate problems.
Who You Are

If this role sounds like a great match, you probably have:
Multiple years of experience combating spam and abuse, conducting forensic analysis and investigations;
Strong experience working with SQL on large data sets;
Experience writing data pipelines with a programming language like R, Python and Go;
Experience using data visualization tools (e.g, Data Studio, Zeppelin) to share ongoing insights;
Strong communication skills to collaborate with other operations, engineering and product teams.,About Us


Launched in 2011, Twitch is a global community that comes together each day to create multiplayer entertainment: unique, live, unpredictable experiences created by the interactions of millions. We bring the joy of co-op to everything, from casual gaming to world-class esports to anime marathons, music, and art streams. Twitch also hosts TwitchCon, where we bring everyone together to celebrate, learn, and grow their personal interests and passions. We're always live at Twitch. Stay up to date on all things Twitch on LinkedIn, Twitter and on our Blog.

About the Role


The Financial Planning and Analysis team partners with all departments at Twitch to guide financial decisions and provide insights. For this role, we are looking for an experienced Data/Business Intelligence Analyst who will oversee data, including repeatable, scaleable and consistent data/dashboard/report building, metrics reviews, channel investments, guidance on success/failure metrics, cost/benefit and ad hoc analysis. You will also manage projects and interact with technical and non-technical staff members throughout the company. Your leadership efforts will have a direct impact on hundreds of stakeholders at Twitch. You will report to our Senior Director of Revenue & Margin Finance.

You Will:
Prioritize and perform in the face of ambiguity: work with partners and mentors to distill the problem, adapt your tools to answer complicated questions, and identify the trade-offs between speed and quality of different approaches
Promote data knowledge and insights: manage communications with your stakeholders and other teams, work with technical and non-technical colleagues to complete data projects and ensure all parties can use the insights to further improve
Create actionable insights from data analysis covering viewer, creator, ad sales, commerce and content deals
Maintain a customer-centric focus: work to be a domain and product expert through data, develop trust among your peers and partners, and ensure that your team has access to data to make decisions
Create analytical frameworks to measure team success: partner with cross-functional teams to establish success metrics, create approaches to track the data and troubleshoot errors, quantify and evaluate the data, then develop a common language for all colleagues to understand these KPIs
Operationalize data processes: provide the team with ad-hoc analysis, automated dashboards, and self-service reporting tools so that everyone gets a good sense of the state of the business
You Have:


A Bachelor's degree and 8+ years of domain experience in a consumer internet business, or in a high-velocity, high-growth product or business unit
Experience building customer insights from transaction data including LTV, CAC, with fluency in data analysis, including time series analysis, cohort analysis, experimentation, data visualization, and defining KPI strategy
Expert SQL skills. Ability to tap into Twitch's data pipeline will be important
Strategic and analytical capabilities
Strong ability to lead projects
Bonus Points
Product analytics experience with signup funnels, engagement metrics, and retention analysis
Technical background and programming experience especially R or Python
Statistics knowledge and hypothesis testing experience
Experience developing dashboards using Tableau
Passion about online communities, games, and Twitch
Perks
Medical, Dental, Vision & Disability Insurance
401(k)
Maternity & Parental Leave
Flexible PTO
Commuter Benefits
Amazon Employee Discount
Monthly Contribution & Discounts for Wellness Related Activities & Programs (e.g., gym memberships, off-site massages, etc.)
Breakfast, Lunch & Dinner Served Daily
Free Snacks & Beverages
We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity at Twitch. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or disability status.

Pursuant to the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance, we will consider for employment qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records.,Company


A unique and highly-impactful role at one of the fastest-growing global cryptocurrency exchanges based in SF-SOMA (with stunning views of the Bay Bridge). The data analyst - risk analysis will be driving the analysis for key decisions and insight across the risk & compliance, finance and other departments to identify insights needed to improve our processes and controls globally.

Job Functions


In this role, you'll get to:
Facilitate internal data requests including developing transaction and fraud monitoring rules and testing, assure quality and data integrity for external audits and exams, provide analysis on customer profiles and transaction activity
Design and implement analytics strategies to convert data into actionable business intelligence
Build and automate key performance dashboards and metrics reporting for all Compliance, Risk & Finance processes to display insights and provide transparency about our customers and our platform
Map all required data points to understand the current data architecture and seek improvements, where necessary
Break down complex business problems into key components and detailed requirements; to understand the root cause and develop actionable solutions
Collaborate cross functionally with product, engineering, compliance and finance teams both in the US and internationally
Possibility of travel to Beijing, Hong Kong, Malta and other overseas offices
On the first day, we'll expect you to have:
BA/BS in Statistics, Computer Science or a related technical field or equivalent practical experience
At least 5 years of experience in data analytics or closely related field
Fluency in Chinese-Mandarin is required for the role (speaking and writing)
Prior experience analyzing compliance, finance or risk data is a plus
A strong intuition for crafting raw data and analysis into well-written and persuasive content
Expertise in SQL and knowledge of cloud data environments e.g. AWS
Familiarity with Excel, Tableau, Looker, or similar reporting tools
Strong interpersonal skills, with an emphasis on teamwork, initiative, and integrity
Comfort with working in a fast-paced environment and handling multiple priorities simultaneously
It's great, but not required if you have:
Experience with scripting and analysis languages (Python, R, SQL)
Prior experience working in the Digital Assets or Financial Services industry
Industry or educational experience in text mining, information retrieval, knowledge extraction, and building knowledge graphs
OKCoin Statement:

OKCoin is committed to equal employment opportunities regardless of race, color, genetic information, creed, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, lawful alien status, national origin, age, marital status, and non-job related physical or mental disability, or protected veteran status.,Since 2005, BOLD has established itself as a job seeker's ally. Unlike our competitors that specialize in posting jobs for employers, BOLD's focus steadfastly remains on the job seeker. Our top-rated tools offer job seekers of every walk of life the help they need to get the jobs they want.A profitable, mature startup, BOLD walks with the job seeker through every phase of the job search process. Our award-winning resume and cover letter builders have helped millions of job seekers in more than 180 countries create the application materials they need to succeed.BOLD's brands have a presence across the globe and BOLD is continuing to build its international offerings and serve millions of job seekers.Department SummaryThis role is on our Analytics team. This team partners with Product, Marketing, and Finance to produce world-class analysis and provide recommendations that improve our products and increase customer engagement.Position SummaryBOLD is looking for an enthusiastic SENIOR PRODUCT DATA ANALYST to join our team. You will provide critical insights to business partners and strategic support to the executive team. You will also have your fingers on the pulse of the business and develop metrics and reporting to keep the organization informed. Through your high-quality analysis and attention to detail, you will be the go-to person for product performance and insights. The ideal candidate is highly motivated and will use their technical skills and business acumen to quickly make an impact!Position Responsibilities* Conduct in-depth analysis to uncover opportunities for improving our products.* Work closely with business partners to extract meaningful insights using a variety of data sources: relational databases, front-end analytics tools, clickstream data, etc.* Present insights and recommendations to executive leadership using high quality visualizations and concise messaging.* Design and analyze A/B tests to drive KPI improvements.* Build machine learning models to predict customer behavior and better understand the drivers of customer engagement and retention.* Develop dashboards to inform business decisions with an emphasis on automation and scalability.* Collaborate with Engineering to advance data infrastructure and governance.Required Qualifications* 5+ years' experience performing quantitative analysis, preferably for an internet or technology company.* Bachelors or Master's degree in Math, Engineering, Statistics or other quantitative field, with a track record of academic excellence.* Self-starter with a desire to learn and the ability to rapidly understand the business and its drivers.* Ability to write complex SQL queries to drive critical business decisions.* Robust understanding of Statistics with ability to explain statistical concepts to non-technical audiences.* Proficiency with Python/R* Experience with building machine learning/predictive models.* Ability to handle multiple projects and meet deadlines in a fast-paced environmentDesired Qualifications* Proficiency with BI tools such as Tableau, Looker, or equivalent* Experience with Google Analytics, MixPanel or other front-end analytical platforms a plus.* Experience with NLP (Natural Language Processing) is a plus.ABOUT BOLDBOLD is a fast-paced, innovative company full of smart, committed people who are passionate about our products and love helping people find the career of their dreams. We balance work and fun while continuing to build a successful, fast-growing company that is changing the way people get jobs.Our vision is to revolutionize the online career world by creating transformational products that help people find the careers they love and reach their full potential.BOLD is an equal opportunity employer. All persons will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, pregnancy, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, age, legally protected physical or mental disability, covered veteran status, status in the U.S. uniformed services, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital status, genetic information or membership in any other legally protected category.Qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records will be considered for the position in accordance with San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance.,Since 2005, BOLD has established itself as a job seeker's ally. Unlike our competitors that specialize in posting jobs for employers, BOLD's focus steadfastly remains on the job seeker. Our top-rated tools offer job seekers of every walk of life the help they need to get the jobs they want.

A profitable, mature startup, BOLD walks with the job seeker through every phase of the job search process. Our award-winning resume and cover letter builders have helped millions of job seekers in more than 180 countries create the application materials they need to succeed.

BOLD's brands have a presence across the globe and BOLD is continuing to build its international offerings and serve millions of job seekers.

Department Summary

This role is on our Analytics team. This team partners with Product, Marketing, and Finance to produce world-class analysis and provide recommendations that improve our products and increase customer engagement.

Position Summary

BOLD is looking for an enthusiastic SENIOR PRODUCT DATA ANALYST to join our team. You will provide critical insights to business partners and strategic support to the executive team. You will also have your fingers on the pulse of the business and develop metrics and reporting to keep the organization informed. Through your high-quality analysis and attention to detail, you will be the go-to person for product performance and insights. The ideal candidate is highly motivated and will use their technical skills and business acumen to quickly make an impact!

Position Responsibilities
Conduct in-depth analysis to uncover opportunities for improving our products.
Work closely with business partners to extract meaningful insights using a variety of data sources: relational databases, front-end analytics tools, clickstream data, etc.
Present insights and recommendations to executive leadership using high quality visualizations and concise messaging.
Design and analyze A/B tests to drive KPI improvements.
Build machine learning models to predict customer behavior and better understand the drivers of customer engagement and retention.
Develop dashboards to inform business decisions with an emphasis on automation and scalability.
Collaborate with Engineering to advance data infrastructure and governance.
Required Qualifications
5+ years' experience performing quantitative analysis, preferably for an internet or technology company.
Bachelors or Master's degree in Math, Engineering, Statistics or other quantitative field, with a track record of academic excellence.
Self-starter with a desire to learn and the ability to rapidly understand the business and its drivers.
Ability to write complex SQL queries to drive critical business decisions.
Robust understanding of Statistics with ability to explain statistical concepts to non-technical audiences.
Proficiency with Python/R
Experience with building machine learning/predictive models.
Ability to handle multiple projects and meet deadlines in a fast-paced environment
Desired Qualifications
Proficiency with BI tools such as Tableau, Looker, or equivalent
Experience with Google Analytics, MixPanel or other front-end analytical platforms a plus.
Experience with NLP (Natural Language Processing) is a plus.
ABOUT BOLD

BOLD is a fast-paced, innovative company full of smart, committed people who are passionate about our products and love helping people find the career of their dreams. We balance work and fun while continuing to build a successful, fast-growing company that is changing the way people get jobs.

Our vision is to revolutionize the online career world by creating transformational products that help people find the careers they love and reach their full potential.

BOLD is an equal opportunity employer. All persons will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, pregnancy, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, age, legally protected physical or mental disability, covered veteran status, status in the U.S. uniformed services, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital status, genetic information or membership in any other legally protected category.

Qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records will be considered for the position in accordance with San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance.,Who we areLilt makes it possible for every organization to communicate with their customers in the language of their choice affordably and at scale. The product combines human expertise and machine efficiency in a complete enterprise localization solution. Our mission is to make the world's information accessible to everyone, regardless of where they were born or which language they speak.We recruit the world's best human translators and equip them with our neural machine translation system, allowing them to translate faster and better than ever. Our technology is based on NLP and HCI research from Stanford and UC Berkeley.Lilt is backed by some of the world's leading investors including Sequoia, Redpoint, Zetta, and XSeed Capital. Our customers include some of the largest Fortune 500 companies in the world who rely on Lilt every day to provide more personal customer experiences in 50+ languages.Our team is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in Berlin, Dublin and Indianapolis.Who we wantWe seek a Data Analyst who will be responsible for generating weekly company metrics, customer invoices & reports, and supporting our business teams on data-driven leadership.As a Data Analyst, you will help build our growing data analytics vertical and drive company-wide insights that lead to step-function operational improvements. You will partner with leadership and teams from across the business - from sales to finance - to help unpack ambiguous problems and build lasting, scalable analytics solutions.Our ideal candidate is organized, action-oriented, incessantly curious, and loves creating insights out of ambiguity.He or she possesses analytical and technical skills, and is keen to be at the cross section of multiple teams and functions.Responsibilities* Deliver weekly company metrics to the executive team* Juggle multiple operational tasks across customer invoicing, translator payments, weekly reporting and forecasting* Work on one-off investigations to resolve high-visibility and ambiguous problems* Build and maintain core dashboards and tables* Utilize and develop your SQL, Salesforce and Tableau skillsSkills and Experience Needed* 2+ years of work experience in a highly analytical and operational role within a rapidly growing tech company* Highly analytical and data-driven* Experience in SQL, Chartio, Salesforce and Tableau* Sharp attention to detail* Bias towards action* Thrives in a fast-paced, results-oriented environment* Strong work ethicExperience (Preferred)* Experience at an early stage startup (50-150 employees)* Experience with Python, Hubspot, Salesforce and Business Intelligence dashboards is a major advantageBenefits* Competitive salary and meaningful equity* Employer-subsidized medical, dental, and vision coverage* 401k with company matching up to 4%* Catered lunch once a week and fully stocked kitchen* Professional development budget. Buy some books. Attend a conference. Take a class. Whatever you feel will help you do your best work!* International off-sites. Twice a year, we get our San Francisco and Berlin offices together. Locations alternate between Europe and the United States.,Because you belong at Twilio

The Who, What, Where and Why

Twilio is growing rapidly and seeking Sr. Sales Compensation Data Analyst to join our Sales Compensation team. This is a great role for a compensation / operations professional looking to further develop their career in a fast pace, high growth company. The person in this role will contribute their analytical skills, working with various data sources to provide business insights and solve complex problems.To be successful, the person will need attention to details, experience as a compensation data analyst and deep understanding of the popular data analysis tools

Who?

Twilio is looking for a person who lives the Twilio Magic and has a demonstrated track record of managing, analysing and automating large data sets.. They also have:
3-5 years of experience as data or business analyst in sales operations, finance or similar discipline in software / technology industry
Prior experience with SQL, Python or similar technologies; ability to maintain and optimize code, focusing on accuracy and quality
Prior experience with administering SFDC data objects
Solid understanding and experience in data collection, processing, governance, reporting and analytics of large data sets
Proven track record in automating data processes using industry standard tools
Experience with Github/logging/documentation; FTP experience is a plus
Understanding of sales compensation and commission calculations; capable of developing and improving sales compensation data related processes
Solid project/program management skills
Excellent communication skills: verbal and written
Bachelor's Degree
What?

As a Senior Sales Compensation Data analyst, you will live the Twilio Magic values:
BE AN OWNER: Understand various data sources used in sales compensation calculations
NO SHENANIGANS: Collect, validate, analyze, manage sales compensation data to support commission processes and analyze sales performance results
DON'T SETTLE: Automate commissions processing by connecting disparate data sources, developing and managing data models and creating scripts
BE INCLUSIVE: Collaborate with Operations, Finance, IT and other functions to implement,improve and automate data processes
WEAR THE CUSTOMERS SHOES: Support the team in calculating monthly, quarterly and annual payouts based on achievement
WRITE IT DOWN: Contribute to the development and improvement of systems to effectively capture, track and present compensation data.
Why?

The Sales Compensation team is crucial to the success and scalability of our sales organization and its supporting teams. This important role focuses on managing, analyzing and automating sales compensation data, closely cooperating with the team members, stakeholders and supporting functions

Twilio is a company that is empowering the world's developers with modern communication in order to build better applications. Twilio is truly unique; we are a company committed to your growth, your learning, your development, and your entire employee experience. We only win when our employees succeed and we're dedicated to helping you develop your strengths. We have a cultural foundation built on diversity, inclusion, and innovation and we want you and your ideas to thrive at Twilio.

Where?

This position will be located in our Denver office. Around the world, Twilio offers benefits and perks to support the physical, financial, and emotional well being of you and your loved ones. No matter where you are based, you will experience a company that believes in small teams for maximum impact; seeks well-rounded talent to ensure a full perspective on our customers' experience, understands that this is a marathon, not a sprint; that continuously and purposefully builds an inclusive culture that empowers everyone to do their best work and be the best version of themselves.

About us:

Millions of developers around the world have used Twilio to unlock the magic of communications to improve any human experience. Twilio has democratized communications channels like voice, text, chat, video and email by virtualizing the world's communications infrastructure through APIs that are simple enough for any developer to use, yet robust enough to power the world's most demanding applications. By making communications a part of every software developer's toolkit, Twilio is enabling innovators across every industry — from emerging leaders to the world's largest organizations — to reinvent how companies engage with their customers.

Twilio is proud to be an equal opportunity workplace and is an affirmative action employer. We are committed to equal opportunity regardless of race, color, ancestry, religion, gender, gender identity, parental or pregnancy status, national origin, sexual orientation, age, citizenship, marital status, disability, or Veteran status and operate in compliance with the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance.,The Motley Fool is looking for a Data Analyst to own the data strategy for one of our newest (and coolest) business lines - Soapbox Financial Network.

The Motley Fool's mission is to make the world smarter, happier, and richer, and Soapbox is tasked with taking that to the next level. We're providing readers with valuable financial information beyond The Motley Fool’s traditional coverage of the stock market. Soapbox is acquiring blogs from an array of smart, insightful, expert storytellers on finance-related topics from budgeting to travel hacks to the FIRE movement and beyond. Our goal is to help readers improve their financial lives and raise up exciting voices who are aligned with our mission.

Our small team has an exciting startup feel with the confidence and capital of an established and beloved brand. In this role, we’re looking for someone who is entrepreneurial, an expert data storyteller, and motivated to dig deeper and uncover the why behind any meaningful data trend. And the ideal candidate isn't interested in data for the sake of data, rather he or she thrives on making real-world differences for the team and its business strategy and direction. This role is responsible for:
Informing the acquisition process through analysis, valuation, and modeling
Uncovering the top optimization opportunities across our network of sites
Building reporting and alerting tools that keep us updated on our key metrics and what’s moving them
Collaborating with the other members of the Soapbox team to implement A/B tests and new initiatives based on your data-driven recommendations
You might be a good fit if you:
Have a track record of growing traffic to content sites from opportunities that you’ve found in web analytics data
Love to set up A/B tests to see your insights in action
Are a total Google Analytics nerd and can clearly communicate the difference between bounce rate and exit rate. Big Query experience is a plus!
Build actionable reports and dashboards that your team uses regularly to make data-driven decisions
Understand SEO and are comfortable using SEO tools for reporting and analysis
Sound like you? Then let’s chat! Send us your resume and cover letter that describe who you are, what you've done, and why you're excited about this role.,Ibotta is seeking a Senior Data Quality Analyst to help us build data assets that help make every purchase rewarding for millions of shoppers.. We're looking for a leader who has a passion for making sure critical data pipelines are producing data and analytics of the highest quality.

Here is what you'll be doing:
Serve as a data quality champion at Ibotta, driving a quality strategy and priorities across various teams and functions
Become an expert in Ibotta's data, data pipelines, and business processes
Identify, analyze, and drive remediation of root cause data quality issues
Develop active data quality monitoring and measurement procedures, establishing and publishing KPIs and SLAs, and developing reporting strategies for the company including for senior leadership
Work in close partnership with business, technology, and product leaders to identify, document, tier, and prioritize critical data pipelines
Design, implement, and maintain data quality controls in critical Ibotta data pipelines
Manage company-wide data quality issue reporting and tracking tools and procedures
Develop and maintain tools, templates, and methodologies to support the execution and implementation of Ibotta's data quality policies and standards
Focus on driving on-going technology and process improvements and evolution to ensure continuous data quality improvements to Ibotta's data assets
Here is what we're looking for:
Change agent comfortable with working/driving change in a matrix organization
Systems thinker, with the ability to analyze, document, and improve complex processes across many actors, disciplines, and modes of operation
Excellent communication and presentation abilities with obsessive attention to detail
Self-starter with "data detective" sensibilities and ability to manage multiple threads and priorities
5+ years of data and data analysis experience
Advanced knowledge of SQL
High degree of proficiency in a scripting language such as Python
Experience extracting data from both structured and unstructured sources using traditional data technologies such as SQL but also Big Data technologies such as Hive, Presto, and Spark
About Us:

Headquartered in Denver, CO, Ibotta ("I bought a...") is a free app that's transforming the shopping experience by making every purchase rewarding. The company partners with leading brands and retailers to offer real cash back on groceries, travel, electronics, clothing, gifts, home and office supplies, dining out, and much more. Ibotta is the ultimate starting point for savings, and having paid out more than $500 million in cash rewards to its Savers, it's no surprise why Ibotta is one of the most downloaded shopping apps in the United States

Learn more about Ibotta here: https://liferewarded.ibotta.com/press-and-media/

To learn more about what our Tech teams are doing day to day, visit Building Ibotta on Medium.com.

Additional Details:
This position is located in Denver, CO and includes competitive pay, benefits package (including medical, dental, vision), 401k, commuter stipend, Unlimited PTO and equity.
Ibotta provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, and genetics.
Applicants must be currently authorized to work in the United States on a full-time basis.