About Cubist
Cubist Systematic Strategies is one of the world’s premier investment firms. The firm deploys systematic, computer-driven trading strategies across multiple liquid asset classes, including equities, futures and foreign exchange. The core of our effort is rigorous research into a wide range of market anomalies, fueled by our unparalleled access to a wide range of publicly available data sources.
Job Description
We are passionate about data. We collaborate to build elegant, effective, scalable and highly reliable solutions to empower predictive modelling in finance.
Cubist’s Data Services group is looking for a Data Analyst to join our dedicated team. Our group is responsible for the timely delivery of comprehensive and error-free data to some of the most demanding and successful systematic Portfolio Managers in the world.
This exceptional individual will be a member of a small team of Data Scientists/Analysts who play a vital role in ensuring the smooth day-to-day implementation of a large research infrastructure, and the live production trading of billions of dollars of capital across global capital markets, including equities, futures, options and other financial instruments.
Job Responsibilities
Identifying potential data sources
Coordinating with compliance team and legal team on new vendor trial/subscription process
Assisting with collecting and maintaining vendor overviews and content offerings
Assisting with data questions and requests from investment teams
Setting up feed downloads and monitor check-in database
Monitoring the automated data collection and cleansing infrastructure
Assisting with scheduling meetings and conference calls between data users and experts
Assisting Data team with interoffice travel arrangements, expenses, etc.
Assisting in organizing presentations
Managing data trial repository permissions
Downloading trial datasets from vendor FTP sites or other delivery mechanism
Assisting Data Team with manual data processing as required
Maintaining Cubist Data Wiki contents
Desirable Candidates
Bachelor degree required
Basic understanding of SQL.
Programming skills in Python and at least one of C#, C++, or Java are a plus
Proficient knowledge of Microsoft Outlook, Excel, and Word
Financial industry experience is preferred but not required
Strong organization, communication and interpersonal skills
Attention to detail and a love of process
Strong oral and written communication skills
Ability to exercise sound judgment in assessing and determining how to handle queries, calls and issues
Ability to multitask and prioritize assignments,Two Sigma is a different kind of investment manager. Since 2001, we have used data science and technology to derive insights that forecast the future and discover value in markets worldwide. Our team of scientists, technologists and academics looks beyond traditional finance to understand the bigger picture and develop creative solutions to some of the world’s most difficult economic problems. Our work spans markets and industries, from insurance and securities to private investments and new ventures.

We are seeking a business / data analyst to join our Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team. Our group supports the firm’s Management Committee and business leads by producing key metrics highlighting the financial performance of the firm and each of the business units in order to drive critical business decisions. Successful candidates will have the opportunity to shape and influence the growth and strategy of the firm through insightful, data-driven analyses.

You will take on the following responsibilities:
Manage our financial data platform by partnering with engineering to maintain and design reporting/analytic tools
Enhance existing data schema and improve process management
Deliver analyses on business unit profitability and resource / cost allocations to support decision making
Partner with business leaders to deliver the annual budget, along with quarterly updates, outlining the strategic outlook of the firm
Act as the key contact for expense analytics across our various business units and key initiatives
Future responsibilities will include:
Partnering with business leaders to launch new business initiatives / product development
Instituting innovative reporting, analytics, and policy to influence behavior across the firm
Incorporating FP&A practices across Modeling, Engineering and Corporate areas (e.g. cost optimization, resource allocations, etc.)
Project lead on high exposure initiatives across the firm
You should possess the following qualifications:
1-5 years of relevant work experience (business analytics)
Bachelor’s degree in Finance/Computer Science/Engineering/Mathematics or related field
Ability to work with structured data
Experience with programming languages (ex. Python, SQL)
Strong analytical and financial modeling skills
Attention to detail
Strong Excel skills
Excellent communication and presentation skills
You will enjoy the following benefits:
Core Benefits: Fully paid medical and dental insurance premiums for employees and dependents, competitive 401k match, employer-paid life & disability insurance
Perks: Onsite gyms with laundry service, wellness activities, casual dress, snacks, game rooms
Learning: Tuition reimbursement, conference and training sponsorship
Time Off: Generous vacation and unlimited sick days, competitive paid caregiver leaves
We are proud to be an equal opportunity workplace. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or any other applicable legally protected characteristics.,Data Analyst - Intex Developer


New York

Apply now

Refer someone

Bring your hands-on software development experience to our Credits Market team in New York.

In this highly visible role, you will use your strong Python programming skills to work alongside other senior developers to build data services and integrate them with Excel models for our front office. A knowledge of Intext software applications would be very useful for this role, but not a pre-requisite for application.

Critical to success in this role is 3 years or more of hands-on development experience with data analytics and creating and streamlining data libraries specializing in credit loan models (RMBS, CLO, ABS, student loans etc.). You will also need to be comfortable working in both Linux and Windows and have an understanding of modern system architectures.

To be successful you will need to possess:
a Degree in quantitative field (math, engineering, computer science)
strong technical acumen with Python and Intex in Microsoft and Linux environments
experience collaborating with other developers on non-trivial projects in a fast-paced setting
If you're ready to start your career, please apply now.

Commodities and Global Markets provides clients with an integrated, end-to-end offering across global markets including equities, fixed income, foreign exchange and commodities.

Find out more about Macquarie at www.macquarie.com/about

All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment and will not be discriminated against on the basis of race, colour, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, protected veteran status, genetic information, marital status, gender identity or any other impermissible criterion or circumstance. Macquarie also takes affirmative action in support of its policy to hire and advance in employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans, and individuals with disabilities.

If you're ready to start your career, please apply now.

About Commodities and Global Markets

Commodities and Global Markets provides clients with an integrated, end-to-end offering across global markets including equities, fixed income, foreign exchange and commodities.

Our commitment to Diversity and Inclusion

All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment and will not be discriminated against on the basis of race, colour, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, protected veteran status, genetic information, marital status, gender identity or any other impermissible criterion or circumstance. Macquarie also takes affirmative action in support of its policy to hire and advance in employment of individuals who are minorities, women, protected veterans, and individuals with disabilities.

We recognise that flexibility comes in a variety of forms. Talk to us about what flexibility you need.

*LI-AMERICAS,Summary:

The International Equity Group manages ~$8bn in equity portfolios using a fundamental stock picking approach. The team builds investment portfolios comprised of companies which are profitable, growing, and trade at attractive valuations.

The team is looking for a Portfolio Data Analyst to work closely with the portfolio manager to integrate both internal and external data into the investment process. The ideal candidate will be comfortable with investment metrics as well as data sets, in order to help develop a market and portfolio view.

Responsibilities:

Serve as the coordinator and consolidator of all data sets created and consumed by the team, including market data (Bloomberg, etc.) as well as analytical tools (Excel, Tableau, etc.). Though the Portfolio Data Analyst will be primarily working with one Portfolio Manager, s/he will have the opportunity to work with various members of the team on a range of issues, including:
Implementing a Research Management System (RMS) including the creation and implementation of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).
Aggregate market data and holdings information as inputs into optimal portfolio construction and risk management.
Work with analysts to deepen the use of data by the team’s Analysts and Portfolio Managers.
Help with producing and publishing market research to share with clients via presentation and White Papers.
Strengthen and improve existing processes around ESG information and broker use.
Requirements:
2+ years of experience in IT, business and/or financial analysis.
Familiarity with basic financial principles and metrics including financial statements and ratios, as well as economic and market data.
Applicants must be systems- & process-oriented. Experience in project management a plus as well as having above-average knowledge of Microsoft Excel, Bloomberg & Tableau.
The ideal candidate will be detail oriented, a quick learner, and keen to work at the heart of the portfolio management process. S/he will demonstrate initiative, be a problem solver, and have the confidence to ask difficult questions.
Neuberger Berman is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer. The Firm and its affiliates do not discriminate in employment because of race, creed, national origin, religion, age, color, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, citizenship status or protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by local, state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations. If you would like to contact us regarding the accessibility of our website or need assistance completing the application process, please contact onlineaccommodations@nb.com.

Learn about the Applicant Privacy Notice.,The Data/Information Mgt Analyst is a strategic professional who stays abreast of developments within own field and contributes to directional strategy by considering their application in own job and the business. Recognized technical authority for an area within the business. Requires basic commercial awareness. There are typically multiple people within the business that provide the same level of subject matter expertise. Developed communication and diplomacy skills are required in order to guide, influence and convince others, in particular colleagues in other areas and occasional external customers. Significant impact on the area through complex deliverables. Provides advice and counsel related to the technology or operations of the business. Work impacts an entire area, which eventually affects the overall performance and effectiveness of the sub-function/job family. Responsibilities: This function covers incumbents responsible for various data activities, which include database administration, data analysis, maintenance, data quality, and database management or database architecture / design engineering Day-to-day focus is on resolution of complex problems or transactions, where expertise is required to interpret against policies, guidelines or processes Role at this level usually has full ownership for one or more processes, reports, procedures or products, and may also be considered analytical or procedural experts representing a unit or team on cross-function process or project deliverables May supervise day-to-day work of junior level employees Appropriately assess risk when business decisions are made, demonstrating particular consideration for the firm's reputation and safeguarding Citigroup, its clients and assets, by driving compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations, adhering to Policy, applying sound ethical judgment regarding personal behavior, conduct and business practices, and escalating, managing and reporting control issues with transparency. Qualifications: 6-10 years of experience Experience in a quantitative field Excellent analytical and practical problem solving abilities Solid understanding of the consumer lending market, customer life cycle, and P&L Experience in segmentation, modeling, and optimization Working experience in Financial/Credit Card Industry Know-how on analytic tools (SAS E-miner, Knowledge Seeker, SPSS etc.) and methodologies (regression, CHAID, simulation, etc.) Big data and machine learning experiences are (R, Python etc.) Education: Bachelors/University degree, Masters degree preferred This job description provides a high-level review of the types of work performed. Other job-related duties may be assigned as required. ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type :Full time ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,Position Overview:
The
descriptive analytics analyst role is responsible for supporting
the Investment Banking management team. Their main responsibilities will be to understand the investment banking
data to which they are expected to derive insights from and present to senior
management. Important aspects of this role are to be able to prepare and
understand data as well as communicate back to the business using reports, presentations,
and conversations.

Basic
Requirements:

·

Expert knowledge of SQL

·

Expert Excel skills

·

Python programming skills (data preparation and presentation)

·

Knowledge of the Salesforce data model

·

Curious, relentless, and ability
to work independently

·

Excellent written/verbal
communication and interpersonal skills

Desired Skills

·

Power BI development Skills

·

Tier1 data model knowledge a plus

·

Investment banking domain knowledge,The team interacts daily with the Global Index Research Group, a part of the JP Morgan Corporate Investment Banking Research, across its global footprint (in New York, London and Asia) to ensure that the index processes, requests and systems are operating efficiently. Functions performed by the wider team in CIB include: Fixed Income market research to produce robust cutting-edge benchmark products and custom solutions for institutional investors and ETF providers, across the globe; client interaction for strategic queries on index products; commercialization of index services and analytical tools to buy-side clients and vendors; Implementation of new index analytics tools and platform for better client service. **Key Responsibilities and Skills:** Daily third-party price capture & validation of bond prices versus multiple market sources Analyze price movements against market news and expectations Liaise with pricing vendor to resolve issues and minimize risk Monitor systems for related job success and resolve issues by working with technology teams Monitor and review the pricing, FX and analytics for an extended instrument universe of fixed income securities as part of a daily operational support team Track corporate actions and events on the security universe and ensure that the resulting analytics are in line with expectation Perform simulation and analysis on instrument changes and events like defaults, restructuring, schedule revisions, PIK changes, cashflow events, settlement convention. Support what-if scenario simulation for portfolio estimates Monitor the fixed income market for events that will have implications on particular sectors Take part in the analytics generation, modeling and onboarding of different types of fixed income securities. Support the design of operational processes to automate some activities moving forward Support queries from internal clients on data distribution, capture, and unexpected moves of time series Lead the coordination with internal teams (e.g. technology, Reference data, index management) and external data vendors as part of data quality improvement activities Analyze large amounts of data to improve processes and asses quality Participate and present in client monthly meetings **Qualification** + Bachelor degree with preference in Computer Science, Engineering, Finance, Accounting, Economics or related field + Bachelor's degree in a quantitative finance field; alternatively economics with experience in data manipulation + Credible understanding of financial market products and Bond math + Knowledge of a scripting language or a data processing tool (MATLAB, Python, R, Eviews). Intermediate Microsoft Excel/VBA and Microsoft office desired + Understanding of financial markets and financial products + Problem-solving ability and general understanding of statistics + Excellent communication skills (Verbal/Written/Presentation) as this role requires daily interaction with a global team + Self-starter, team player and collaborative mindset toward technology and business partners + Familiarity with Market Data platforms such as Bloomberg, Reuters, Factset + Prior experience working in finance or economics + Prior experience of working with data manipulation techniques and visualizations JPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management. We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs. Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,Cowen Investment Management is looking for a data analyst to join the Cowen Sustainable Investments team. The role will work closely with both the portfolio team and the technology team at Cowen.

The strategy is focused on sustainable investing with an ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance) mandate.

Responsibilities
Analyze structured and unstructured data, build valuation, risk management, capital structure arbitrage and other financial models.
Build and improve existing quantitative models that focus on statistics, machine learning and deep learning; including building, data gathering, data cleaning, and data analysis in both deal-specific and non-deal specific scenarios.
Design technology systems in MatLab/Python and build web user interface for a cross-asset class investment team.
Coordinate with technology group to incorporate quantitative models into web-based user interface.
Requirements
An undergraduate or graduate program in a quantitative field such as Computer Science, Statistics, Engineering, Applied Mathematics, or Physics.
Strong analytical and programming skills with focus on machine learning
Applied experience in object-oriented programming, client/server programming and statistical analysis, specifically with javaScript, ASP.NET and preferably ReactJS, Matlab, Nuget/GIT, SVN.
Demonstrated ability to work cooperatively with team members
Ability to work independently in a fast-paced environment
An exceptional work ethic,Requisition ID: 87418

Join the Global Community of Scotiabankers to help customers become better off.

The e-GFI QS team is looking for a new team member who will work in close collaboration with US Fixed Income trading to apply quantitative techniques to the US Rates Sales & Trading business line. The team is composed of individuals possessing a mix of skills including business knowledge, mathematical modelling, programming, machine learning, and data science. This position is appropriate for someone who wants to help solve the complex problems arising from the mission to bring a high degree of automation to the Fixed Income trading business. This role will be a crucial team member in what is a top strategic priority for Global Banking and Markets.

Is this role right for you?
Develop data-driven models to facilitate automatic pricing, risk management, hedge selection and execution
Prioritize a key initiative to deliver client value reporting
Responsibility for developing and maintaining US Rates’ tick data infrastructure in conjunction with IT to ensure fidelity of data and accuracy of model outputs
The ability to work as an extension of the trading desk, understanding markets/trading , generating analytics, making recommendations, and driving total P&L
The ability to communicate effectively between the traders, technologists, and other team members
Do you have the skills you need to succeed? We'd love to work with you if you have:
Experience with KDB or other tick DB
Experience or familiarity with FICC Trading
Excellent mathematical skills
Familiarity with reinforcement learning, neural networks or other machine learning techniques
A Masters or PhD in a quantitative field or a BSc with significant relevant experience
Familiarity with coding in Python
Knowledge of Scala or another functional programming language, or willing to learn
Self-motivation and an entrepreneurial attitude towards problem solving and the pursuit of process improvement
Location(s): United States : New York : New York City

As Canada's International Bank, we are a diverse and global team. We speak more than 100 languages with backgrounds from more than 120 countries. Our employees are committed to a superior customer experience and use the Bank’s six guiding sales practice principles to ensure they act with honesty and integrity.

At Scotiabank, we value the unique skills and experiences each individual brings to the Bank, and are committed to creating and maintaining an inclusive and accessible environment for everyone. If you require accommodation (including, but not limited to, an accessible interview site, alternate format documents, ASL Interpreter, or Assistive Technology) during the recruitment and selection process, please let our Recruitment team know. If you require technical assistance, please click here. Candidates must apply directly online to be considered for this role. We thank all applicants for their interest in a career at Scotiabank; however, only those candidates who are selected for an interview will be contacted.,United States - New York
Operations
Group Functions
Job Reference #
210654BR
City
New York
Job Type
Full Time
Your role
Are you an analytical thinker? Are you an experienced data analyst with a proven track record of delivering analytics to provide data-driven results and insights?

• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets using structured analysis techniques and tools
• Assist in the development and implementation of innovative analytical and/or statistical methodologies to profile the bank’s data
• Execute Data Extraction, Data Mining and Data Profiling analysis on data sets using the structured data analytics tool (e.g. Alteryx, Trifacta, Informatica IDQ, Datactics), in-line with defined procedures
• Document Data Profiling findings and insights for presentation to Data Owners and Data Stewards
• Lead projects and workshops independently with IT and Business data Subject Matter Experts to facilitate the Data Profiling process
• Facilitate the continuous improvement of Data Profiling/Analytics tooling, processes and procedures
• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities
Your team
You'll be working as part of the Data Profiling team in New York. As part of the Data Quality team within Group Data Management Office, the Data Profiling team is responsible for supporting Data Profiling across the organization. You will be part of a team that helps drive data quality across the enterprise by providing data insights through structured and comprehensive data analysis.
Your expertise
• Proven experience in Data Extraction, Data Mining, Data Acquisition and Data Profiling using data quality and analysis tools (e.g. Alteryx, Trifacta, Informatica IDQ, Datactics etc.)
• Experience in the Financial Services sector and one or more relevant data domains, including Trade, Position, Instrument, Client and Counterparty
• Experience with analyzing and reporting data in order to identify issues, trends, or exceptions to drive improvement of results and find solutions
• Good understanding of operational processes, preferably within the Financial Services industry
• Ability to conduct full change lifecycle analysis to include requirements, design and implementation
• Strong project manager abilities to organize and run data profiling projects
• Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)

• BA/BS Degree in Information Science, Data Analytics, Computer Science, Software Engineering or related technical field.
• Experience with Enterprise Data Warehouse development and ETL processes
• Experience in SQL skills and data visualization skills using BI tools (Tableau, Business Objects etc.) to make actionable dashboards
• Experience with Alteryx platform a major plus
• Good understanding of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence and familiarity with Python
• Understanding of cloud infrastructure
About us
Expert advice. Wealth management. Investment banking. Asset management. Retail banking in Switzerland. And all the support functions. That's what we do. And we do it for private and institutional clients as well as corporations around the world.

We are about 60,000 employees in all major financial centers, in more than 50 countries. Do you want to be one of us?
Join us
We're a truly global, collaborative and friendly group of people. Having a diverse, inclusive and respectful workplace is important to us. And we support your career development, internal mobility and work-life balance. If this sounds interesting, apply now.
Disclaimer / Policy Statements
UBS is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We respect and seek to empower each individual and support the diverse cultures, perspectives, skills and experiences within our workforce.,This VP Research Project Analyst role is a quantitative analyst ("quant") who works to support Citi Mortgage hedging desks, principally the Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR) Hedging Desk, a group responsible for managing the risks of a large mortgage-product portfolio. The key responsibilities of this position are to develop, implement, and manage critical risk valuation and P&L attribution software to enable traders to correctly and efficiently hedge our books. In addition to dealing with MSR, this individual also contributes to other mortgage businesses at Citi, namely the Held To Maturity book and the Mandatory Trading Book. Quants works closely between management, traders, and financial engineers. They use both proprietary and vendor models and APIs to build risk-analysis systems customized for our businesses. Quants assist traders in model calibration, model stress testing in satisfaction of both internal and regulatory reviews, and building innovative deep-data analyses to help optimize our businesses. Responsibilities: This function covers incumbents responsible for various data activities, which include database administration, data analysis, maintenance, data quality, and database management or database architecture / design engineering Day-to-day focus is on resolution of complex problems or transactions, where expertise is required to interpret against policies, guidelines or processes Role at this level usually has full ownership for one or more processes, reports, procedures or products, and may also be considered analytical or procedural experts representing a unit or team on cross-function process or project deliverables Appropriately assess risk when business decisions are made, demonstrating particular consideration for the firm's reputation and safeguarding Citigroup, its clients and assets, by driving compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations, adhering to Policy, applying sound ethical judgment regarding personal behavior, conduct and business practices, and escalating, managing and reporting control issues with transparency. Qualifications: 2-4 years of experience in a quantitative field or equivalent academic experience Work experience in a financial field is an advantage Excellent analytical and practical problem-solving abilities Solid understanding of mortgage market, risk measures, and accounting Programming expertise: both technical prowess, as well as experience with large code bases Spreadsheet, as well as VBA, skills Experience with modeling, optimization, simulation, and/or supervised learning is an advantage Experience with data-bases (e.g., SQL) and analytical languages (e.g., R, SAS, py) is an advantage Education: Bachelors/University degree, Masters degree preferred This job description provides a high-level review of the types of work performed. Other job-related duties may be assigned as required. ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type :Full time ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,United States - New Jersey
Business management, administration and support
Global Wealth Management
Job Reference #
213111BR
City
Weehawken
Job Type
Full Time
Your role
Do you understand the importance of data as a business driver? Do you share a passion for data management and data governance? We’re looking for an individual with passion for data to support the Data Management framework implementation at US Wealth Management.

You’ll:

– Build and implement the documentation standards and content to meet any internal and external needs
– Produce and maintain Data Governance documentation and artifacts
– Play a key role in defining, documenting and implementing key data governance processes (e.g., data quality issue management) and metrics
– Collaborate and engage in Data Governance activities with the group Data Management organization, US WM Data Stewards, Data Owners, business SMEs and IT stakeholders
– Manage standards and documentation related to the regulatory initiatives (e.g., BCBS239, CCAR)
– Mentor Data Governance team, business and IT SMEs on proper usage of documents and standards
– Define and measure US WM Data Governance effectiveness through the set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
– Build strong relationships with stakeholders to ensure timely and high quality delivery
– Communicate the importance of managing data as an asset in all aspects of the role
Your team
You’ll be working as part of the Chief Data Officer Office at US Wealth Management. Our mission is to enable better business intelligence and decisions through data that is accessible, trusted and understood.
Your expertise
You have:
– Solid knowledge of data governance principles and processes
– Hands on knowledge of data governance and data profiling tools (e.g., Collibra, SQL, IDQ)
– Ability to break down complex problems into components, identify root causes, and establish resolution plans
– Proficient in the use of Microsoft Office applications
– 5+ years of experience in the data industry, background in managing projects is a plus
– Excellent presentation and communication (orally and written) skills
– Ability to effectively communicate complex concepts
– Ability to adapt to change and to detect and respond to evolving business needs

You are:
– Excellent communicator, with great interpersonal skills
– Analytical and logical
– Highly motivated self-starter with ability to work independently and creatively as well as within a team
– Team player, collaborative and inclusive

About us
Expert advice. Wealth management. Investment banking. Asset management. Retail banking in Switzerland. And all the support functions. That's what we do. And we do it for private and institutional clients as well as corporations around the world.

We are about 60,000 employees in all major financial centers, in more than 50 countries. Do you want to be one of us?
Join us
We're a truly global, collaborative and friendly group of people. Having a diverse, inclusive and respectful workplace is important to us. And we support your career development, internal mobility and work-life balance. If this sounds interesting, apply now.
Disclaimer / Policy Statements
UBS is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We respect and seek to empower each individual and support the diverse cultures, perspectives, skills and experiences within our workforce.,City
New York

Education Level
Bachelor's Degree

Business Unit
Investment Management

Job description
WE OFFER
The Investment Management Summer Analyst Program is a 10-week program consisting of one week of training and nine weeks working within a specific IM team.
Across all IM teams, the curriculum is designed to equip Summer Analysts with the fundamental skills they need to be successful in IM.
During the 10-week program, Summer Analysts experience the culture and atmosphere of Morgan Stanley by performing a role similar to a Full-Time Analyst.
The Data & Analytics Group (DAG) offers exposure to a central team in the COO Office of IM, where high quality data is put at the heart of the various functions within IM.
YOU WILL
Collaborate with advanced analytics team to originate research projects and ideas
Assist in conducting research on various business management and investment topics
Conduct exploratory data analysis of new alternative data sets, including summary statistics and visualizations; present these findings to team lead
Prepare analytics pitch decks and present to internal stakeholders
QUALIFICATIONS
Pursuing a Bachelor's degree with superior academic performance and will graduate between December 2021 and June 2022
Highly motivated self-starter
Team orientated with ability to collaborate with colleagues across the DAG and the broader organization
Outstanding verbal and written communication skills
Knowledge of SQL or Python for data analysis as well as knowledge of data visualization tools (i.e. Tableau), are both a plus
Strong critical thinking skills
Interest in and knowledge of the financial markets, preferred

Job Level
Summer Analyst

Program
Summer Analyst,The Chief Data Office (CDO) is an enterprise authority empowered by the Executive Oversight Committee to define data management strategies, drive data management priorities, and issue Enterprise Data Standards and guidelines with the goal of enhancing and continuously improving the controls over creation and maintenance of data. The CDO drives data management discipline for the firm and fosters a culture that recognizes data as the fuel that drives our business. CDOs processes and network of partnerships sustain Citis commitment to continuously improve data quality. The Chief Data Office is in need of a dynamic, execution focused Lead Business Analyst to drive the effective and efficient design, and development of Data Governance and Data Quality solutions for the enterprise. The candidate will be a part of highly visible program initiatives and provide support to the team lead which will require to work independently at times and across a wide range of stakeholders globally in technology, Retail, Investment Banking, Operations, Finance, Risk and within the CDO. This role is critical in supporting the Citis Data Quality Program by managing the implementation to deliver modern solutions that address business needs, provide necessary controls on SDLC procedures while minimizing the costs, risks, and time to market of project deliverables. Specific duties will include but are not limited to the following: • Working with a multi-disciplinary group of business teams and technologists • Coordinating centralized implementation (i.e. data lineage) efforts led by the CDO to ensure consistency across multiple teams globally and make sure the plan stays in-line with Citi Data management policy (CDMP) and CDOs vision. • Lead discussions and requirement gathering sessions, reaching consensus and recommended solutions on system development projects, enhancements, and issue resolution activities • Coordinating and planning work activities, meetings and other tasks that demonstrate leadership with measurable results • Defining and documenting detailed business requirements, procedures, and use cases • Designing, documenting and executing user acceptance testing activities • Document ing system and workflow processes and procedures • Assisting in and/or creating raining materials QUALIFICATIONS • Bachelors degree and / or equivalent experience • 6+ years of experience with business analysis, business requirements documentation including use cases, design specifications and data flows, and user acceptance testing • Strong analytical skills required, including a thorough understanding of how to interpret business needs and translate them into application and operational requirements • Project Management and Software Development Life Cycle experience required • Knowledge of Financial Services Industry and Data Quality principles and practices • Excellent interpersonal, verbal and written communication skills • Ability to communicate effectively with both system technology and business staff and across multiple layers of management • Ability to work independently and take personal initiative • Demonstrated ability and experience in negotiation, facilitation and consensus-building • Ability to lead and to collaborate effectively within the team as well as with cross-functional team members • Must demonstrate the ability to manage multiple priorities [or tasks], deliver timely and accurate work products with a customer service focus, and respond with a sense of urgency as required • Proven ability to exercise sound judgment and strong problem solving skills • Must be detail oriented with strong organizational skills • Ability to adapt quickly to changing business priorities • Lean expertise preferred Experience with HPQC, MS Office Suite, SharePoint , data lineage and data governance tools • Understanding of technology platforms (i.e retail, investment banking or functions), and application lifecycle management • Experience with or certification in Data Quality / Data Management / Quality Management is also a plus ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type :Full time ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,As an experienced professional in Business Analysis, you'll shape the technology solutionsthat drive strategic initiatives across the firm. Working at the intersection of business andtechnology, you'll interact with colleagues in various lines of businesses to learn aboutchallenges and opportunities, and translate that insight into high-quality solutions. In additionto working with the development team to create new solutions, you'll help optimize existingtechnology and identify new capabilities. While your role requires deep technological skills -including expertise in everything from data management to functional design - it also hingeson teamwork and leadership. You'll offer clear guidance and feedback to your BusinessAnalysis colleagues, while promoting the values, culture and brand of JPMorgan Chase & Co.The Senior Business and Data Analyst will be performing business and data analysis on several inter-dependent, highly complex data requirements across several lines of business in the Investment Bank. Successful candidate will have strong analytical and problem solving skills, understanding of trade lifecycle from execution through settlement, good knowledge reference data, and above-average presentation and communication skills. The Senior Business and Data Analyst will work with application development teams and their interdependencies and will demonstrate partnership skills by interacting with other technology teams within the company to understand, document and interpret complex requirements. In addition, this candidate will be able to work closely with business partners and data owners, to define, track and manage various data migration and data quality work streams.The candidate will be responsible for gathering the requirements for several lines of business regarding client trades, accounts, and reporting and reference data, and should have a strong understanding of at least one of the following businesses: Global Markets Operations, Prime Brokerage, Cleared Derivatives, Custody, or Fund Services.She/he will have responsibility for gathering and analyzing requirements, writing functional and data specifications, and working closely with senior business users to validate prior to application development. In addition, the role will require involvement in an iterative software development model, requiring agility and flexibility on the part of the analyst to handle requirements changes. Program management responsibilities involve overseeing and tracking several parallel work streams amongst different technical and business groups.Client management is an integral part of the role, and as such the successful candidate will be responsible for project governance, including managing user groups and communicating status to senior technology and business sponsors. Excellent verbal and written communication will be essential for effectiveness in this role.This role requires a wide range of strengths and capabilities, including:+ BS/BA degree or equivalent experience+ Expert knowledge in all business processes across an entire line of business, as well expertise in other lines of business and technology disciplines+ Understanding of global and line of business project and program management standards and methods+ Experience working with high-performing teams in complex program execution+ A strong understanding of Waterfall and Agile methods; stakeholder management; budget management, risk management and operations+ Ability to create and maintain relationships with a wide range of stakeholders throughout the firm+ Strong Financial industry experience. Financial industry experience with exposure to post trade domain including: custody, fund administration, trade services, prime, lifecycle management, investment record, asset servicing, treasury services and reporting+ Strong PM experience within technology organization.+ Must have Data center migration experience with application development+ Must have hands on project and program management experience; must have a track records of project go live implementations.+ Must have Technology infrastructure or application development experience.+ Excellent communication skills, and the ability to articulate complex issues conciselyJPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,Lead Generation Data AnalystAt Brown Brothers Harriman, we believe no job is too big or small for any of us to handle if it helps our clients. We value passionate, committed people who enjoy collaborating with others to find new solutions to complex business challenges. We are looking for the type of person who speaks their mind, truly listens and steps outside their role to add value wherever they can. Someone who is driven to get things done and views obstacles as an exciting challenge that demands a creative solution. Above all, we seek someone who takes great pride in their work and is inspired and motivated by their role in protecting and enhancing our client's financial well-being.If you are looking for an entrepreneurial environment where you can learn and thrive, Brown Brothers Harriman is the right place for you.Join us as a Lead Generation Data AnalystBrown Brothers Harriman is currently recruiting a Lead Generation Data Analyst to join our Private Banking Team. In this role you will sit within the Private Banking Marketing and Sales Enablement team and will be responsible for collaborating with Relationship Management (RM) teams, researching prospective clients and working with RM teams and Sales Enablement on further outreach and tracking progress. In addition, you will manage create and update monthly AUM flows reporting, to be used by Private Banking leadership. This person will be a strategic thinker who is expert in Excel and builds high-quality lists through value-added research, identifies points of connectivity through additional research and partners with business development teams on a plan to cultivate relationships. The successful candidate will be research oriented, process driven and have a strong attention to detail.The Lead Generation Data Analyst will play a crucial role in creating, implementing and reinforcing best practices and procedures to make the lead generation discipline and the RMs with whom they work successful. The Lead Generation Data Analyst will communicate key performance indicators (KPIs) to the Marketing and RM leadership teams in Private Banking. Additionally, the Lead Generation Strategist will work with the Sales Enablement discipline and RM teams to gather pipeline data and other relevant sales information to create a monthly report for management on sales KPIs.Some of your key responsibilities include:1. Lead Generation* Create and maintain relationships with RMs and build understanding of existing RM relationships and target prospect segments, e.g., client types, industries, geographies, etc.* Work with RM teams to build high-quality lists through value-added research, identify points of connectivity through additional research and partner with business development teams on a plan to cultivate relationships and track progress* Work with RM teams and Sales Enablement to create packages of materials to send to prospective clients; on a limited basis, write letters and emails for RMs to forward to prospective clients* Create a process for follow-on outreach for RM teams; create a pipeline report and check with RM teams on progress of open opportunities over time* Track activities in the CRM, including outreach, meetings and client wins* Help to manage research tool subscriptions across the line of business2. Track, Measure and Report on Sales Data* Work with Sales Enablement and Private Banking leadership to track and measure sales pipeline and asset flows on a monthly basis* Create a report for management that shows sales KPIs across the business3. Lead Gen Measurement and Reporting* Create KPI report to measure success of overall lead generation platform across PB; regularly communicate KPIs to Marketing, RM and PB leadership* Track and communicate lead gen and follow-up best practices to RM teams with the Head of MarketingQualifications:* BA or Equivalent* 3-5+ years of experience* Experience with lead generation programs and Private Wealth Management/Private Banking preferred* A self-starter who will take initiative to create, build and measure the program; process oriented* Ability to work both independently and on a team* Ability to build strong relationships across different groups within a large organization* Ability to interface with potential clients in a manner that represents the BBH brand and our services* Exceptional organizational skills and attention to detail* Strong problem solving skills* Exceptional written and verbal communication skills* Strong Microsoft Excel skills; PowerPoint and Word skills preferred* Experience with CRM systems preferred but not requiredWhat We Offer:* A collaborative environment that enables you to step outside your role to add value wherever you can* Direct access to clients, information and experts across all business areas around the world* Opportunities to grow your expertise, take on new challenges, and reinvent yourself-without leaving the firm* A culture of inclusion that values each employee's unique perspective* High-quality benefits program emphasizing good health, financial security, and peace of mind* Rewarding work with the flexibility to enjoy personal and family experiences at every career stage* Volunteer opportunities to give back to your community and help transform the lives of others#LI-POSTWe are an equal opportunity employer and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, genetic information, creed, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability status, protected veteran status, or any other protected status under federal, state or local law.Full timeNew York,Summer Analyst ProgramBNY Mellon's Summer Analyst Program (SAP) provides high-potential students with a well-rounded, rewarding internship experience as well as an inside look into what it's like to work for a global financial services organization that has been innovating and serving clients since 1784. With projects specifically chosen to both challenge and develop SAP participants, our summer analysts will gain valuable real-world experiences working in their respective line of business/function as well as learn to work together in collaborative teams.From day one, summer analysts are immersed in BNY Mellon's innovative and dynamic company culture as they will receive:* meaningful and challenging work assignments;* networking opportunities with peers, senior leaders and executives;* exposure to different areas of business;* comprehensive professional etiquette and financial services fundamentals training; and* understanding of BNY Mellon's commitment to diversity and inclusionProgram At A Glance:* 9-week (EMEA) or 10-week (U.S.) summer internship assignment within an identified line of business or division of BNY Mellon* that combines learning with skill development through practical work and projects;* two-day in-person orientation/onboarding and virtual training curriculum; plus* career development and networking support from a host of corporate leaders including rotation assignment managers, senior mentors, peer mentors, business stakeholders and a dedicated program manager.Program Highlights:* Small, selective program size that allows for more personal attention and support;* Participants can further develop their technical and business acumen skills/expertise, enhance leadership abilities and build networks across the organization;* Robust onboarding and training curriculum designed specifically for summer analysts;* Full commitment from top-level management to make our program the premier internship/talent pipeline program within the financial services industryPost-SAP Opportunities:SAP aims to create a pipeline of talent to feed entry-level pipeline programs and entry-level, full-time position hiring needs. Upon successful completion of the program, summer analysts will have opportunities to apply for full-time employment, including: the Emerging Leaders Program (ELP), the Operations Campus Analyst Program (OCAP) and direct hire roles. Overall performance during the Summer Analyst Program and business need will be determining factors in full-time placement.QualificationsProgram Eligibility/Qualifications:* Enrollment in a 4-year undergraduate (U.S.) or full-time undergraduate (UK) degree program with a strong focus on business-related and/or technology-related majors;* Rising senior (U.S.) or penultimate year students (UK) during summer 2021;* Minimum cumulative GPA of 3.2 or better (U.S.) or 2:1 (UK);* Well-rounded and balanced background including demonstrated leadership abilities;* Strong written and oral communication skills;* Not require sponsorship for employment visa status (now or in the future) in the region where they apply.BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-New York-New YorkInternal Jobcode: 05375Job: Asset ServicingOrganization: AS Eagle Cloud And EMS-HR06432Requisition Number: 2006993,The Bank of New York Mellon is a provider of investment services and investment management and we are a world-renowned leader in each. When combined, the power of our extensive capabilities can help drive your success in markets around the world. BNY Mellon is the corporate brand of The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation.BNY Mellon Technology's mission is to provide our business partners with technology based solutions that enhance their ability to be successful through world-class software solutions maintained on a stable and secure infrastructure, and to provide our employees with the tools and means to enhance their professional qualifications and careers.Our TeamTSG provides reliable, resilient, next-generation enterprise technology infrastructure and support that enables BNY Mellon employees to deliver the whole firm to their colleagues and clients around the world. We are continuously improving automation and bridging the gap between cost, customer needs, and innovative tools to ensure the best possible experience.TSG Production Services team is dedicated to ensuring that our technology environments are best in class. Our Production Services team runs the systems that keep BNY Mellon running. Ourmission is to deliver a full IT service management lifecycle across all run-the-bank applications and infrastructure support with the purpose of providing a controlled, secure, and predictable production environment.Our team members use their technical skills and business knowledge to bring forth solutions that will take our company into the future. If you are a collaborative continual learner with a global mindset and a desire to contribute to our company's top priorities, this is the place for you.The RoleThe Service Management Office is actively seeking a Data Analyst who will be responsible for building, maintaining, and improving the Service Management Reporting platform.We are responsible for proactive governance, control, and continuous improvement of the Production Services Operating model, underlying IT operational processes and supporting tools to ensure optimal and effective service delivery, production stability and regulatory compliance.Key Responsibilities:* Perform analysis and end-to-end execution from roadmap to implementation of database consolidations, migrations, conversions and upgrades* Drive design build and management of large, complex Oracle database running on Oracle 12c environments on Exadata.* Participate in planning and executing database migrations, application software upgrades/migrations.* Provide proactive input into design issues/constraints and enforcing data integrity across multiple platforms.* Manage logins and user accounts, including assigning database object permissions and ancillary privileges.* Schedules and manages jobs for data transfers, procedures and monitors performance and impact on operations.* Database performance monitoring and tuning: Closely monitor performance, identify problems and implement solutions;* Performing ad-hoc reviews and updates as required to resolve data discrepanciesSpecialist Data Analyst->> Designs and creates highly complex logical/physical data models, and data dictionaries that cater to the specific business and functional requirements of applications. Consults with businesses to identify needs and translates those needs into data architecture solutions. Develops comprehensive data/technical specifications that bridge business/product needs with system design/deliverables. Performs data extracts and creates complex data reports to analyze user metrics. Develops understanding of business needs and functionalities to determine compatibility of database with existing hardware/software applications and recommend the most cost effective methods. Consults with database administration and client areas and provides solutions in resolving issues during the translation to a physical database design. Provides knowledge and expertise of enterprise data to assist the business in the creation and definition of internal and external message flows. Provides knowledge and expertise in existing database environments and makes recommendations for opportunities to share data and/or reduce data redundancy. Analyzes market trends for data modeling tools and metadata management software. Provides input into the selection of tools and any necessary migration into the company's environment. Contributes to the achievement of area objectives.QualificationsBachelor's degree in computer science or a related discipline, or equivalent work experience required, 8-10 years of experience in data modeling, data warehousing, data entity analysis, logical and relational database design, or an equivalent combination of education and work experience required, experience in the securities or financial services industry is a plus.Required:* Strong knowledge of Oracle;* Experience in database performance tuning and database mangement* Data Modelling experience* Analytical mindset with problem-solving skillsPreferred:* Knowledge of ITIL framework will be a plus* Prior experience with ServiceNowBNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-New York-New YorkInternal Jobcode: 45151Job: Information TechnologyOrganization: Technology Production Services-HR17024Requisition Number: 2006570,Summer Analyst Program

BNY Mellons Summer Analyst Program (SAP) provides high-potential students with a well-rounded, rewarding internship experience as well as an inside look into what its like to work for a global financial services organization that has been innovating and serving clients since 1784. With projects specifically chosen to both challenge and develop SAP participants, our summer analysts will gain valuable real-world experiences working in their respective line of business/function as well as learn to work together in collaborative teams.

From day one, summer analysts are immersed in BNY Mellons innovative and dynamic company culture as they will receive:
meaningful and challenging work assignments;
networking opportunities with peers, senior leaders and executives;
exposure to different areas of business;
comprehensive professional etiquette and financial services fundamentals training; and
understanding of BNY Mellons commitment to diversity and inclusion
Program At A Glance:
9-week (EMEA) or 10-week (U.S.) summer internship assignment within an identified line of business or division of BNY Mellon* that combines learning with skill development through practical work and projects;
two-day in-person orientation/onboarding and virtual training curriculum; plus
career development and networking support from a host of corporate leaders including rotation assignment managers, senior mentors, peer mentors, business stakeholders and a dedicated program manager.
Program Highlights:
Small, selective program size that allows for more personal attention and support;
Participants can further develop their technical and business acumen skills/expertise, enhance leadership abilities and build networks across the organization;
Robust onboarding and training curriculum designed specifically for summer analysts;
Full commitment from top-level management to make our program the premier internship/talent pipeline program within the financial services industry
Post-SAP Opportunities:

SAP aims to create a pipeline of talent to feed entry-level pipeline programs and entry-level, full-time position hiring needs. Upon successful completion of the program, summer analysts will have opportunities to apply for full-time employment, including: the Emerging Leaders Program (ELP), the Operations Campus Analyst Program (OCAP) and direct hire roles. Overall performance during the Summer Analyst Program and business need will be determining factors in full-time placement.

Qualifications


Program Eligibility/Qualifications:
Enrollment in a 4-year undergraduate (U.S.) or full-time undergraduate (UK) degree program with a strong focus on business-related and/or technology-related majors;
Rising senior (U.S.) or penultimate year students (UK) during summer 2021;
Minimum cumulative GPA of 3.2 or better (U.S.) or 2:1 (UK);
Well-rounded and balanced background including demonstrated leadership abilities;
Strong written and oral communication skills;
Not require sponsorship for employment visa status (now or in the future) in the region where they apply.
BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.
Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.
Our ambition is to build the best global team one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.

Primary Location: United States-New York-New York
Internal Jobcode: 05375
Job: Asset Servicing
Organization: AS Eagle Cloud And EMS-HR06432
Requisition Number: 2006993,The Data Analyst is a part of the Risk and Regulatory Applications group within JRI-A. This individual is responsible for managing IT projects, and providing specifications, configurations, test plans and test scripts for complex technology initiatives. This role participates in the design, build and implementation of Risk and Regulatory Reporting platforms in collaboration with technical development teams. Also coordinates work efforts to address functionality enhancements, application updates and application performance issues. Provides technical knowledge and expertise when developing solutions to meet complex business requirements. Reports to the Head of Risk Management and Regulatory Reporting Applications. Has no direct/indirect reports.
JRI America, Inc., ("JRI-A"), is a subsidiary of the Japanese IT financial services company, Japan Research Institute Ltd ("JRI"), which is the specialist IT subsidiary of Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group ("SMFG"). SMFG which owns Japan's second-largest bank, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation ("SMBC") by asset size and a Fortune Global 200 company offers a broad range of financial services, primarily banking-related. The group is also engaged in leasing, securities, credit cards, mortgage securitization, venture capital and other credit related businesses and employs over 60,000 people worldwide and has a stated strategic objective of further global expansion. JRI-A provides information technology services in the Western Hemisphere (including the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa) that support the Group’s operations.

Completes projects or assigned tasks in accordance with defined project management methodology.
Designs and implements regulatory reporting projects and data interfaces.
Works with business leaders to write and obtain approval for business requirements documents (BRDs) and project requirements document as needed.
Prepares detailed specifications from which programs are developed and coded.
Ensures programs meet standards and technical specifications, performs technical analysis and component delivery.
Collaborates with functional teams (e.g. Application Architecture and Information Security) to understand how changes affect current and future applications/systems/functions; ensures effective implementation and communication of those changes throughout the project lifecycle.
Performs impact analyses to identify the impacted areas and develops the required tests/tests sets for the required build; ensures policies and procedures are followed for testing new technology.
Provides strong vendor management by coordinating initial contracts, resolving issues, maintaining communication, accountability and financial discipline.
Research various data sources to identify required data for Regulatory Reporting requirements.
Ability to gain buy in and support of stakeholders on data requirements for regulatory reporting.
Knowledge and proficiency in BHC/IHC regulatory reporting, in particular, FRY 15.
Demonstrated experience designing PL SQL/ETL and integration to reporting platforms.
Formal project management expertise and knowledge of project management methodology/SDLC/PLC/Agile processes in IT financial services environments.
Expert understanding of data quality and data lineage.
Detailed, thorough, diligent individual with robust data analysis, customer service and time management skills.
Excellent verbal, written and interpersonal communications skills.
Highly collaborative with ability to work in a culturally diverse and team oriented environment.
Understanding of financial products including loans, leases, collateral, derivatives.
Understanding of banking including payments, direct deposits. etc..

6 + years’ experience at a financial institution working in Capital Markets and working on IHC/BHC formation projects.
BA / BS in Computer Science or Finance or comparable discipline required. Preferred: MA / MS / MBA.
Software Systems / Programming Languages.
PL SQL and/or T SQL development.
Familiarity with IBM Datastage, Familiarity with IBM Infosphere Information Analyzer, and Governance Catalogue.
#LI-CG1,Organization & Department Overview The Information Services Group (ISG) is responsible for providing authoritative sources of reference data to our clients across the Institutional Client Services (ICG) organization, through implementing state of the art technologies and operational processes which promote the collection, storage, analysis, and distribution of product, pricing, account and corporate action data. The ISG organization works in partnership with data clients across all ICG business lines, deploying solutions to increase their competitiveness, through restructuring business processes, simplifying information access, and providing business intelligence around critical data. Execution team is tasked with the enhancement to the system including new vendor feeds coverage, data model enhancement and updates to existing data from vendors. This may involve analyzing multiple data sets manually or engineering automated solutions. Domain data is critical to the reference data processing and product and pricing data must be available, accurate, and complete for global financial markets. Job description Financial Data Modeling Consult with subject matter experts and developers to reverse engineer and document legacy system functions Independently query and analyze unstructured data from multiple relational databases in order to: Diagnose data quality issues. Assess system impacts for upcoming changes. Define data processing rules. Conduct functional testing. Work closely with IT and Operations partners. Work closely with upstream data vendors (internal and external to Citigroup). Independently manage assigned projects. Participate in weekly change management forums. Required Skills Bachelors degree, specialized training or equivalent work experience Working experience of 8 years minimal as Business Analyst Financial Knowledge on Securities/Products. Data analysis and mapping (able to query data, analyze and map) Data Oriented with an excellent attention to detail SQL knowledge Experience working closely with IT Project managers and development teams Experience/understanding of business process reengineering and business modeling concepts, business systems development and analysis Strong analytical skills and writing skills, including solid experience in writing functional and technical specifications Excellent verbal communication skills with the ability to be assertive Ability to focus on high quality work while under pressure Preferred Skills Project management/lead experience Background in reference data with a focus on securities and pricing Knowledge of MS Office, Visio Experience with vendor product implementation Aptitude and interest in continued learning. ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type :Full time ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,Data Governance & Management (DG&M) is a global function within CIB Securities Services. The team uses Business Intelligence tools to drive strategic program initiatives, deliver Fintech solutions, and ensure data is properly managed end-to-end. The Data Management Team ensures the proper data governance framework is in place through data analytics and data ownership. The team resolves data issues at the root cause through data lineage, and works with partners across Operations, Technology, Risk & Compliance and Controls to strategically resolve issues. The team's responsibility is a blend of project management, Fintech/automatons builds and heavy data analysis. We partner with strategic programs across the CIB globally. The team frequently coordinates with reference data providers such as Broadridge, Bloomberg, and DTC. We work with JP Morgan's Chief Data Office to drive adoption of the firm-wide Data Management policies and standards, and deliver value to the wider department through reduction in effort and errors. Finally, we produce metrics, KPI and analysis to assist the management team in making data-driven decisions.• Drive projects that will deliver strategic solutions both using and with-in data.• Coordinate between operations and technology, engage SMEs, and manage deliverables end to end• Establish and lead working groups to perform data deep dive, process mappings, and root cause analysis• Coordinate between external reference data providers (Broadridge, Bloomberg, DTC, etc.) as well as internally between operations, chief data office, middle office, front office, technology, legal, and compliance.• Generate metrics, fintech tools (Qlikview/tableau dashboards, alteryx/xceptor automations, etc.) and produce reporting for senior management using data• Partner on Firmwide initiatives to identify authoritative data sources to complete logical data models (data lineage) and define data elements in data book• Create process efficiencies across Sec Ops Services by eliminating breaks, resolving manual workarounds, and providing clean data• Frequently help create automated solutions through robotics to tactically address data quality issues+ Provide data intelligence to senior management through data mapping, analysis, etc. for potential Business cases. (Ex: use cases for machine learning and artificial intelligence, system consolidation opportunities, creating data lakes or data marts to centralize and harmonize data, impact analysis to show how ops/tech changes will flow downstream, Data comparisons to determine preferred data source, data security/safeguarding opportunities, etc.)+ Drive data education and awareness though fintech forums, monthly newsletters/trainings, etcMicrosoft Office (Excel), Power Point, , Visio, Project, SharePoint), Alteryx, Qlikview, tableau (A plus), Project Management, data analysis & understanding of data conceptsJPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,About the Chief Data Office

The FDM Data Quality group is aligned to the Firmwide Chief Data Officer, Rob Casper. The CDO's vision is to create an industry-leading data environment in terms of control, cost, and revenue opportunity. The program scope continues to evolve and encompasses cultural, behavioral, procedural and systemic transformation across the full range of data domains. Firmwide & CIB CDO offers a unique perspective into the role of data quality in the financial industry, and partners with a variety of stakeholders across LOBs, Corporate Functions and other teams in the Firmwide Data Management organization. The Chief Data Office offers a unique opportunity to be part of a journey that drives the entire strategy of how we manage data in the future - our key raw material for efficiently managing the business.
Department Description
With exponential year-over-year growth of data generated, strong Data Governance, including Data Quality, is critical to ensure clean, fit-for-purpose data for the firm. The Firmwide & CIB Chief Data Office (CDO) is responsible for defining and implementing the Firmwide Data Quality strategy to ensure fit for purpose data. The Data Quality department is accountable for transforming the entire firm's approach to data quality by establishing clear ownership and accountability for critical data, and implementing effective Reactive, Proactive, and Preventative data quality standards, capabilities and processes.

The Reactive Data Quality team is responsible for defining how the Firm manages Data Quality Issue identification, analysis, and remediation effectively and consistently firmwide. Crucial tasks include daily advisory support for our stakeholders across the firm, the development of new Data Quality Metrics, and evolving the operating models, processes, and tooling to drive adoption and enable implementation of agreed best practices.

Background

The successful candidate will join a team focused on delivering business impact through transformation of Data Quality management:

Of importance in 2020 is the ensuring the successful roll out of a transformative new tool, the Intelligent Data Assistant (IDA). IDA is an artificial intelligence platform that enables end users to report Data Quality issues through an intuitive interface. The team would like to expand the usage of IDA to incorporate additional use cases, such as managing issues that are already opened, and addressing data needs outside of Data Quality. The candidate will be expected to understand the business use cases of Data Management and configure/code them in the AI platform that powers IDA, or support stakeholders in doing so themselves.

Also of significance in 2020 is establishing the Data Content owner as a new role across the Firm. The DCO is a new accountable role that will be tasked, among other things, with ensuring effective Data Quality issue management. The candidate will be expected to drive process and tooling enhancements to accommodate the influx of new DCO users by leading small working groups, documenting necessary updates, and holding action owners accountable.

The candidate will be expected support the team in implementing these two major CTB projects, as well as ensuring adequate governance and management of the existing book of work. Managing the existing book of work includes: serving as an escalation point or advisory service with stakeholders regarding issue management processes; partnering with FDM Tech in managing requirements in JIRA with AGILE project management; and producing metrics (Excel, Qlik or Tableau) for Sr. management on the Data Quality book of work.

This role provides an outstanding opportunity at JPMorgan Chase for the selected candidate to join a high profile team and take a partnership role, working with stakeholders across the CIB, other LOBs and Corporate Functions, to support some of the Bank's most significant change programs.

Key roles and responsibilities:
The successful candidate will support the DQ Team's existing overall book of work:
Develop, enhance and present senior management MIS around Data Quality
Minimize risks of technology releases in Firmwide Data Quality applications through effective change management
Liaise with SMEs across the Firm on DQ issues to facilitate timely resolution of pressing matters, participating in / driving deep dive sessions where necessary
Partner with Controls Org to develop DQ processes in the context of Operational Risk
Contribute to the development and execution of the Firmwide Data Quality strategy:
Drive development and adoption of the Intelligent Data Assistant
Support the roll out of the new Data Content Owner role across the firm by leading efforts to train and support new DCOs
Use creative thinking to help establish a culture of Data Quality across the firm (communications, training videos, Syphony posts, infographics, etc)
Liaise with the Firmwide & CIB CDO teams to develop DQ in context of the wider data governance process, e.g. data cataloguing, data integration, etc.
Use Stakeholder partnerships to maintain feedback loop - receiving feedback on DQ processes and tooling and raising to appropriate forum
Perform project management and business analysis on other data quality related projects as required
Skills Required:
Minimum 2 years experience in Financial Services
Excellent communication, presentation (both oral and written) & influencing skills - candidate will be dealing with stakeholders of varying degrees of seniority; ppt design skills a must
A demonstrated ability to conceive, design and implement business process improvements that improve efficiency and risk and control environments
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills
Proficiency in manipulating and analyzing large data sets in Excel (pivots, formulas, charts, etc.). BI experience or a strong desire to learn
Effective change management skills - ability to support & adapt within a changing environment
Self starter, able to work autonomously with discipline, demonstrating strong time management skills; efficient at multi-tasking and able to work under pressure to deliver multiple business demands on-time, to a high standard
Capacity to think laterally and convey an understanding of the big picture
Basic understanding of the company's business practices and familiarity with the company's products and services
Basic understanding of project management lifecycle and Technology SDLC (software development lifecycle), including running a UAT testing program
Knowledge and experience with key Data Management principles would be advantageous
Preferred: Software QA/UAT experience and associated tools (ex. Selenium)
Preferred: Expertise with Qlikview and/or Tableau
Preferred: Experience in developing AI tools such as Amelia, or Machine Learning expertise
JPMorgan Chase & Co. offers an exceptional benefits program and a highly competitive compensation package.

JPMorgan Chase is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer Disability/Veteran.
JPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.

We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.

Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,J.P. Morgan is a global leader in financial services, providing strategic advice and products to the world's most prominent corporations, governments, wealthy individuals and institutional investors. Our first-class business in a first-class way approach to serving clients drives everything we do. We strive to build trusted, long-term partnerships to help our clients achieve their business objectives.

We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.,Job PurposeThe Senior Content Control Analyst is part of a team whose function is to manage all workflows for the Feeds and Desktop businesses as they relate to data entitlement and reporting. This role will design and develop programs and reports in Microsoft centric environment.This is a senior level position on the team that has a tremendous opportunity to showcase not only knowledge but also leadership ability with room for growth based on these abilities.Responsibilities* Primary resource for Exchange/Vendor reporting* Maintain VARS reporting via TCBData* Expert level proficiency in SQL. Ability to perform complex data analysis with large volumes of data* Work with business users to review and analyze needs* Design and develop reports, and queries as appropriate* Build, maintain and troubleshoot SSRS* Review, analyze and develop reports on a variety of projects* Work with Governance and Control teams to understand Exchange/Vendor reporting rulesKnowledge and Experience* Expertise in the SQL language, report writing tools, specifically SSRS* SQL coding experience, including the creation of tables, views, stored procedures, triggers* In depth knowledge of market data vendor commercial concepts (exchange rules, use cases, reporting structures, etc.)* Experience in the data warehouse space* Knowledge of data warehouse principals, hierarchies and tools* Superb communication skills with the ability to easily explain concepts to others including internal stakeholders and customers* Good listening and analytical skills with the ability to absorb rules and/or reporting requirements as provided by our Governance, Content Acquisition teams, and Product Management teams* Ability to work in a fast-paced environment where managing many tasks at once is key* A self-starter who can quickly apply their existing experience to a brand-new system that is proprietary to ICE* Work with sensitive information with the highest degree of integrity and confidentialityPreferred* Experience using SQL for the creation of custom and/or ad-hoc reports* Experience creating business requirements relating to entitlement system enhancements based on feedback from stakeholders* Finance Industry experience a plus* Experience with CRM applications a plus* Ability to plan and work effectivelyIntercontinental Exchange, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin or ancestry, age, disability or veteran status, or other protected status.Additional Information* Job Type: Standard* Schedule: Full-time,Job Description
Daily price capture & validation of all investment types.
Produce and analyze valuation movements within client portfolios on a daily basis.
Review of price confirmation collection within department.
Analyze price movements against market expectations.
Provide subject matter expertise support to downstream teams and clients.
Liaise with pricing vendors, brokers and clients to resolve issues and minimize risk.
Qualifications
1 to 3 years asset pricing or fund accounting experience
Pricing vendor knowledge, i.e. Bloomberg, Reuters
Knowledge of industry activities, particularly corporate actions, index tracking and stock markets and fixed income
products
Understand the effect that changes in prices and other data elements have on the market value of an account and be
sensitive to these changes.
Self motivated and proactive with the proven ability to work accurately and under pressure to meet deadlines.
Demonstrate an understanding and interest in stocks, bonds, options, and financial markets and products.
Intermediate to Advanced MS Excel skills, including pivot tables and v-look ups.
Strong database/SQL knowledge a plus
Mathematical mindset demonstrating strong numerical skills.
Familiarity with statistical analysis and time series data
Strong analytical/problem solving skills and attention to detail.
Demonstrate ability to effectively communicate within a team environment and interact across departments.
Demonstrate customer focus and follow-up skills.
Ability to work independently and multi-task in a fast paced environment.
The role holder will be required to operate flexible working hours to cover early starts and/or late finishes as demanded
by the business.

Bachelor degree with preference in Computer Science, Engineering, Finance, Accounting, or Economics.

JPMorgan Chase & Co. offers an exceptional benefits program and a highly competitive compensation package.

JPMorgan Chase is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer Disability/Veteran.JPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.

We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.

Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,Overview
The Data Analyst is a part of the Risk and Regulatory Applications group within JRI-A. This individual is responsible for managing IT projects, and providing specifications, configurations, test plans and test scripts for complex technology initiatives. This role participates in the design, build and implementation of Risk and Regulatory Reporting platforms in collaboration with technical development teams. Also coordinates work efforts to address functionality enhancements, application updates and application performance issues. Provides technical knowledge and expertise when developing solutions to meet complex business requirements. Reports to the Head of Risk Management and Regulatory Reporting Applications. Has no direct/indirect reports.

JRI America, Inc., ("JRI-A"), is a subsidiary of the Japanese IT financial services company, Japan Research Institute Ltd ("JRI"), which is the specialist IT subsidiary of Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group ("SMFG"). SMFG which owns Japan's second-largest bank, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation ("SMBC") by asset size and a Fortune Global 200 company offers a broad range of financial services, primarily banking-related. The group is also engaged in leasing, securities, credit cards, mortgage securitization, venture capital and other credit related businesses and employs over 60,000 people worldwide and has a stated strategic objective of further global expansion. JRI-A provides information technology services in the Western Hemisphere (including the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa) that support the Group's operations.

Responsibilities
Completes projects or assigned tasks in accordance with defined project management methodology.
Designs and implements regulatory reporting projects and data interfaces.
Works with business leaders to write and obtain approval for business requirements documents (BRDs) and project requirements document as needed.
Prepares detailed specifications from which programs are developed and coded.
Ensures programs meet standards and technical specifications, performs technical analysis and component delivery.
Collaborates with functional teams (e.g. Application Architecture and Information Security) to understand how changes affect current and future applications/systems/functions; ensures effective implementation and communication of those changes throughout the project lifecycle.
Performs impact analyses to identify the impacted areas and develops the required tests/tests sets for the required build; ensures policies and procedures are followed for testing new technology.
Provides strong vendor management by coordinating initial contracts, resolving issues, maintaining communication, accountability and financial discipline.
Research various data sources to identify required data for Regulatory Reporting requirements.
Ability to gain buy in and support of stakeholders on data requirements for regulatory reporting.
Knowledge and proficiency in BHC/IHC regulatory reporting, in particular, FRY 15.
Demonstrated experience designing PL SQL/ETL and integration to reporting platforms.
Formal project management expertise and knowledge of project management methodology/SDLC/PLC/Agile processes in IT financial services environments.
Expert understanding of data quality and data lineage.
Detailed, thorough, diligent individual with robust data analysis, customer service and time management skills.
Excellent verbal, written and interpersonal communications skills.
Highly collaborative with ability to work in a culturally diverse and team oriented environment.
Understanding of financial products including loans, leases, collateral, derivatives.
Understanding of banking including payments, direct deposits. etc..

Qualifications
6 + years' experience at a financial institution working in Capital Markets and working on IHC/BHC formation projects.
BA / BS in Computer Science or Finance or comparable discipline required. Preferred: MA / MS / MBA.
Software Systems / Programming Languages.
PL SQL and/or T SQL development.
Familiarity with IBM Datastage, Familiarity with IBM Infosphere Information Analyzer, and Governance Catalogue.
#LI-CG1,Founded in 1984, Geller & Company is a premier strategic financial and advisory firm serving high net worth individuals and families, corporations, non-profits and foundations. Headquartered in Manhattan, Geller & Company employs more than 500 professionals to help shape and drive our client’s financial strategies. Our team works closely with clients to understand their needs and deliver a tailored suite of services including strategic CFO Consulting, Financial Reporting and Accounting, Technology, Wealth Management and Family Office Services.

Geller’s key client is a leading multi-billion dollar financial services company that outsources its finance organization to Geller. This includes financial planning, analysis and reporting; budgeting and forecasting; and accounting and tax work, with strategic and operational oversight of compensation, capital expenditures, real estate and other worldwide areas. Geller provides world-class finance, accounting and strategic outsourced solutions to CFO’s and other senior-level financial decision makers.

Senior Financial Analyst - Enterprise Data

Your Impact:
Supporting FP&A function by preparing management reporting and analysis for all expenses, headcount, allocations, and business unit product P&Ls.
Liaising with corporate FP&A on business group performance vs. business plans and business metrics.
Partnering with the business across Product, Operations, and Sales to develop the annual operating budget including operating expenses, headcount, compensation and capex.
Synthesizing large amounts of raw data and financial information to communicate a meaningful story to business partners.
Acting as a key contact for the CFO team to the business and across the organization for financial data requests and ad-hoc analysis.
Manage the general ledger hierarchy for new product codes, cost centers and business areas.
Monitoring the monthly close process as it relates to expenses and headcount.
Preparing monthly and quarterly financial information for Management discussing year to date performance against business plan and financial outlook.
Developing processes and tools to identify automation opportunities and improve efficiency of CFO team.
Ensuring compliance with applicable internal and external accounting standards and financial policies.
What you’ll offer:
Bachelors in Accounting or Finance.
Approximately 6 to 10 years of Finance experience with at least 3 years in a finance role supporting a business unit.
Strong quantitative, financial, and analytical skills.
Ability to be flexible and adapt to changing priorities and deliverables in a fast-paced environment.
Strong organizational, written and interpersonal communication skills are essential.
Strong Excel and PowerPoint skills and comfortable working with large data sets and various systems.
Experience with SAP, Business Warehouse, and Hyperion
We’d love to see:
Familiarity with the Bloomberg terminal
Comfortable with learning new systems
Why join Geller & Company?
Opportunity to scale your experience beyond the scope of your role
100% funded health, vision, and dental insurance
401K plan with company match
Generous PTO and paid holidays
Philanthropic opportunities
A wide variety of free and healthy snacks available all day in our café
Discounted health club reimbursement
What's next?

If this sounds like you, apply today and Talent Acquisition will review your application and get in touch if there is match.

Geller & Company is an equal opportunities employer. We do not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, disability status, or caregiver status.,Job PurposeIntercontinental Exchange Inc. (ICE) is a leading global financial information services provider with an established track record of providing mission-critical, high quality financial information and value-added services, including real-time data, pricing and reference data, fixed income evaluations, security and portfolio analytics and customized financial information portals and terminals.We seek highly motivated candidates for an opportunity to join the Content Strategy & Acquisition team which supports ICE's market data content requirements, procurement and analysis. The primary responsibility of this position will be to support the content acquisition process and strategy at ICE by managing contract reviews & negotiations with focus non-exchange market data providers.Responsibilities* Coordinate with business stakeholders on content requirements and strategy* Review, negotiate and process license agreements to ensure broadest content use at the lowest possible price* Negotiate and process amendments to existing market data agreements* Coordinate with Finance on content acquisitions, fee changes and budget forecasting* Manage commercial relationships with market data providers as required* Communicate and interpret rights based on license agreements, exchange policies and other rules, and promote rights management best practices* Act as Subject Matter Expert on market data used throughout firm and leverage that knowledge accordingly to shape and support ICE's content strategy* Manage and/or participate in content related projects & initiatives* Participate in industry conferences and workshopsKnowledge and Experience* Advanced understanding of market data and the financial markets* Excellent communication skills* 5+ years of experience negotiating commercial agreements and strong negotiation skills* 5+ years of contract administration experience* Relationship management experience* High proficiency in Microsoft Office* Familiarity of real time business use cases, end-of-day business use cases, and derived data use cases* Prior experience with a market data vendor and/or market data management within a financial institution encouragedIntercontinental Exchange, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin or ancestry, age, disability or veteran status, or other protected status.Additional Information* Job Type: Standard* Schedule: Full-time,Architecture and Data is the enterprise wide architecture and data services group at BNY Mellon. Our mission is to integrate diverse technologies and facilitate technology re-use. Partner with our businesses increase revenue and lower costs while also reducing risk, increasing resiliency, and enabling more effective service delivery. The team also formulates and executes on our data strategy to reduce complexity and eliminate redundancies in our data. We partner with our technology and business teams to ensure integrity and confidence in our information and provide analytics that solve difficult problems and monetize data for internal and external use.Sr. Specialist Data Analyst->> Designs and creates highly complex logical/physical data models, and data dictionaries that cater to the specific business and functional requirements of applications. Consults with businesses to identify needs and translates those needs into data architecture solutions. Develops comprehensive data/technical specifications that bridge business/product needs with system design/deliverables. Performs data extracts and creates complex data reports to analyze user metrics. Develops understanding of business needs and functionalities to determine compatibility of database with existing hardware/software applications and recommend the most cost effective methods. Consults with database administration and client areas and provides solutions in resolving issues during the translation to a physical database design. Provides knowledge and expertise of enterprise data to assist the business in the creation and definition of internal and external message flows. Provides knowledge and expertise in existing database environments and makes recommendations for opportunities to share data and/or reduce data redundancy. Analyzes market trends for data modeling tools and metadata management software. Provides input into the selection of tools and any necessary migration into the company's environment. Contributes to the achievement of area objectives.QualificationsBachelor's degree in computer science or a related discipline, or equivalent work experience required, 8-10 years of experience in data modeling, data warehousing, data entity analysis, logical and relational database design, or an equivalent combination of education and work experience required, experience in the securities or financial services industry is a plus* 2 or more (1) years of finance/business management experience.* Experience in technology / financial services industry* Ability to solve complex issues* Excellent in Excel and PowerPoint* Strong attention to detail* Proven ability to prioritize and work under tight deadlinesBNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-New Jersey-Florham ParkInternal Jobcode: 45151Job: Information TechnologyOrganization: Architecture And Data-HR16450Requisition Number: 2006188,The Office of the CIO, in BNY Mellon's Technology organization is focused on driving, executing, and optimizing the business of technology, and move toward a stable, resilient and efficient organization. The Specialist, Data and Reporting Analyst, IT Change Management will:* Understanding of either change management processes, project management, software development lifecycle or delivery lifecycle* Analyze change data and coordinate with incident owners to determine root causes of production incidents, identify incident themes and trends for future improvements* Analyze change data and create thematic analysis* Collect, aggregate, organize and analyze data from multiple disparate sources within the organization.* Ability to identify, analyze trends or patterns in complex data set and generate reports* Experience with leveraging advanced Excel and other analytical tools* Develop understanding of systems and data repositories to review and identify data quality gaps and problems.* Work with data owners to cleanup data inconsistencies and incompleteness* Identify and define new process improvement opportunities based on identified resultsQualifications* Bachelor's degree in related discipline, or equivalent work experience required* Knowledge of ServiceNow, Business Objects, Qlik, i.e. is preferable* 6-8 years of experience in data analysis* Experience in the securities or financial services industry is a plus* Strong interpersonal, data visualization, and communications skillsBNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-New Jersey-Florham ParkInternal Jobcode: 45122Job: RiskOrganization: Office of CIO-HR18027Requisition Number: 2006423,Architecture and Data is the enterprise wide architecture and data services group at BNY Mellon. Our mission is to integrate diverse technologies and facilitate technology re-use. Partner with our businesses increase revenue and lower costs while also reducing risk, increasing resiliency, and enabling more effective service delivery. The team also formulates and executes on our data strategy to reduce complexity and eliminate redundancies in our data. We partner with our technology and business teams to ensure integrity and confidence in our information and provide analytics that solve difficult problems and monetize data for internal and external use.

This organization is building out our business and program management office to ensure that we “run Technology as a business.” This Analyst role will be an important contributor of resource reporting controls, business performance measurement, and business continuity planning. This role is critical for successful execution of Technology Architecture and Data’s business insight and strategy.

You will report to the Chief of Staff for Technology Architecture and Data, leveraging your experience and general business knowledge to quickly build strong relationships across various stakeholders. This position will have primary day-to-day responsibility for new resource tracking, business continuity plan review, as well as other resource related information.

Sr. Specialist Data Analyst->> Designs and creates highly complex logical/physical data models, and data dictionaries that cater to the specific business and functional requirements of applications. Consults with businesses to identify needs and translates those needs into data architecture solutions. Develops comprehensive data/technical specifications that bridge business/product needs with system design/deliverables. Performs data extracts and creates complex data reports to analyze user metrics. Develops understanding of business needs and functionalities to determine compatibility of database with existing hardware/software applications and recommend the most cost effective methods. Consults with database administration and client areas and provides solutions in resolving issues during the translation to a physical database design. Provides knowledge and expertise of enterprise data to assist the business in the creation and definition of internal and external message flows. Provides knowledge and expertise in existing database environments and makes recommendations for opportunities to share data and/or reduce data redundancy. Analyzes market trends for data modeling tools and metadata management software. Provides input into the selection of tools and any necessary migration into the company's environment. Contributes to the achievement of area objectives.

Bachelor's degree in computer science or a related discipline, or equivalent work experience required, 8-10 years of experience in data modeling, data warehousing, data entity analysis, logical and relational database design, or an equivalent combination of education and work experience required, experience in the securities or financial services industry is a plus



Key responsibilities
Analyst for Location Planning and Reporting, Coordination of On & Off-Boarding Resources, Business Continuity Planning
Be primary point of contact for Business Continuity Plans and Disaster Recovery Plans
Develop coordination of onboarding process with existing team.
Build out new reporting requirements and transparency for new joiners
Track and monitor key metrics for the organization
Participate in ad-hoc analysis across project resources
Assist in communications efforts including town halls and senior level PowerPoint decks
Support establishment of new business management policies, standards, and processes
Qualifications


2 or more (1) years of finance/business management experience.
Experience in technology / financial services industry
Ability to solve complex issues
Excellent in Excel and PowerPoint
Strong attention to detail
Proven ability to prioritize and work under tight deadlines,Technology Architecture and Data is the enterprise wide architecture and data services group at BNY Mellon. Their mission is to develop and articulate the holistic target state enterprise architecture and partner with various business lines and shared services to execute on a prioritized roadmap. These efforts ensure the optimal use of existing technology capabilities and the development of new ones to increase business revenue and lower costs while reducing risk, increasing resiliency, and enabling more effective service delivery. The team also formulates and executes on our data strategy to reduce complexity and eliminate redundancies in our data.As an experienced strategic leader that can define and deliver on a vision from its highest abstraction to its finest detail, you will drive value from data science.Providing advanced strategic vision with precision tactical guidance for the optimal insertion and delivery of very large-scale data science capabilities within a conservative, deep-legacy, high stakes context.* Collaborating with and supporting leaders and their teams from multiple areas of expertise to ensure strategies, solutions and metrics align to business and operating results.* Providing leadership across multiple lines of business to meld organizational and functional effectiveness and power.* Work with business stakeholders to develop strategic solutions.Engage and coordinate with Line of Business end-users, customers and senior decision makers to ensure we understand how the end-user understands / thinks about their needs, what they understand about the AI/ML capabilities, how they quantify success, and what they can handle in terms of what our delivery can do for them and the interfaces that the end user is already comfortable and proficient with.* Develop a deep understanding and appreciation for the end-user and decision-maker's current resources, User Interfaces, User Experience, pain points and aspirations.* Find key insertion points for new capabilities in ways that are measurably helpful and advantageous in the end-user's terms and language.* Assure our work and solutions drive primarily toward the end-user's objectives and needs such that the results are welcome because they reduce real work, increase real power, and significantly differentiate the client from their competition.* Prepare and cultivate the end-user customer's anticipation and readiness for probabilistic forecasting capabilities in their context.* Earn, build and maintain credible end-user enthusiasm that motivates their desire to learn, understand, master the new tools and share their success widely.Sr. Principal Metrics Analyst->> Provides advanced guidance and technical leadership across multiple areas for CTS organizational and functional effectiveness measurements. Participates in the creation of real-time monitoring and analysis of key performance indicators, developing standard reporting models with visualizations to aid decision making and overall strategy. Establishes strong relationships with internal teams to gain an understanding of their strategies, objectives, and tactics to develop a comprehensive measurement plan. Leads the extraction of business insights to guide direction of learning activities and drive organizational efficiencies, effectiveness and outcomes. Is an expert on the company's total computing environment and planned changes in order to develop meaningful measurements. Stays abreast of technology innovations and trends and identifies areas of improvement. Works with business stakeholders to develop strategic solutions. Collaborates with and supports leaders and their teams from multiple areas of expertise to ensure strategies and measurements are aligned and support business and operating results. Contributes to the achievement of Metrics and Analytics objectives.QualificationsBachelor's degree in a related discipline or equivalent work experience required, advanced degree is beneficial 12+ years of related experience required, experience in the securities or financial services industry is a plus.BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-New York-New YorkInternal Jobcode: 45210Job: Information TechnologyOrganization: Architecture And Data-HR16450Requisition Number: 2003813,MORE ABOUT THIS JOBAre you looking to apply your analytical skills to find trends and the root causes for errors while deepening your understanding of all financial securities? Our Product Data Quality team is seeking a professional who is looking to collaborate with all divisions and global vendors to ensure data accuracy, completeness, and governance. Our team ensures that our reference data can properly serve as a building block for downstream systems performing critical booking, settling, and reconciliation functions. OUR IMPACT Engineering is a dynamic, multi-faceted division that partners with all parts of the firm to deliver banking, sales and trading and asset management capabilities to clients around the world. In addition, Engineering provides essential risk management and control to preserve and enhance the firm's assets and its reputation. For every trade agreed, every new product launched or market entered, every transaction completed, Engineering partners with the business to develops the processes and controls that makes business flow. Product Data Quality is a high-value risk management team in Engineering that, across all firm divisions, is responsible for the governance programs that ensure critical securities modeling and pricing data is accurate, complete, and scalable. This data is a critical input and dependency to most trade and client support functions.RESPONSIBILITIES AND QUALIFICATIONSHOW YOU WILL FULFILL YOUR POTENTIAL• Prepare to gain a comprehensive understanding of all product types and interact with traders, strategists, and other operations professionals.• Proactively resolve data exceptions, dive deep into technical issues to investigate and fix complex issues spanning multiple teams and vendors, and partner with business partners to analyze and implement solutions for new business reference data needs.• Partner with a team of global product experts to leverage knowledge to resolving comprehensive reference data problems that involve multiple stakeholders across multiple teams and divisions.• Showcase your attention to detail and ability to master all aspects of product and pricing reference data and further interpret their attributes to all downstream systems which depend on these same attributes.• Develop strong and effective relationships with critical vendors which supply reference data so that they uplift their controls and provide the most pristine product possible to the firm.• Highlight your ideas for improving processes and implement them globally to impact and uplift the entire process.• Work with senior technologists and project managers on key projects that are re-shaping the reference data support model that is utilized across the entire financial industry.SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE WE ARE LOOKING FOR• Bachelor's degree.• Proven analytical skills, problem solving ability, and a control mentality paired with meticulous attention to detail• Ability to manage multiple concurrent tasks with dynamic and aggressive deadlines.• Aptitude for building relationships and ability to communicate complex issues to a wide array of internal clients with differing levels of product experience.• Self-motivated and proactive team player who takes ownership and accountability of projects, has strong organizational skills as well as the ability to effectively manage competing priorities.• Flexible and able to work well under pressure in a team environment.Preferred QualificationsABOUT GOLDMAN SACHSThe Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals. Founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in New York and maintains offices in all major financial centers around the world. Â© The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., 2020. All rights reserved Goldman Sachs is an equal employment/affirmative action employer Female/Minority/Disability/Vet.,Your skills will shape our future
High quality data is critical to success in the investment industry. Joining a new function that centralizes data management expertise from across the firm, you will have the opportunity to work alongside other data specialists. Western Asset is in the process of building out a new data hub to be a central place for technology applications to consume data and to enable self-service data analysis. Governing the data going into the data hub is a critical component of the success of this strategic initiative. Play a key role in business and technology stakeholder change management, alignment with business demand, data use cases and requirements gathering and translating those requirements to technology solutions.
As a Data Governance Analyst, you will help streamline processes, develop a business centric view of data management: use case requirements for data, data quality management, business data glossary management leveraging tools and technology to develop a new firm wide access point for key business terms. You will gather and analyze large data sets working with business stakeholders to define data quality rules and measures. You’ll contribute ideas and explore new technology while gaining excellent insights into our business that form a strong foundation for future success of Investment Operations.
What you will do
Work directly with business data owners to define and draft business rules and data quality controls for critical data elements through data profiling
Partner to execute training and communication supporting the Data Governance program
Track performance management / metrics and linking and communicating data related effort/work (data prep, data quality) metrics to business value/outcomes KPIs (compliance, risk, efficiency, cost, revenue)
Implement Tableau data quality dashboards to provide status updates
Continuously improve and automate data management workflows
Recommend deployment of tools to monitor and control data quality to business data owners and determine the level of business impact for data quality issues
Facilitate and arbitrate data issue resolution and conflicts across business stakeholders (e.g., definitions, data requirements, quality standards)
Design and recommend data quality issue remediation and escalation processes
Explore innovative tools and technology, evaluate new systems and keep up to speed with industry
Provide data management and governance guidance and best practices in new, changing and complex technology environments: cloud and on premise
Help set / inform standards and compliance for Data Security and Privacy
Join a team of enterprise data professionals
This is a fast-paced, high-pressure team environment where the pace of change is rapid. We need people who are flexible, curious, innovative and adaptable. Open to new ideas and new ways of working, you’ll combine excellent powers of analysis with good people skills. While professional qualifications or experience in finance are welcome, we are equally interested in the new thinking that data specialists from outside the industry can bring. It’s all part of our collaborative approach to moving business forward.
What you will bring
Bachelor’s degree in relevant field; Mathematics, Science or Engineering
Previous Asset/Wealth Management business experience preferred
Ability or previous experience working in Agile environments
Experience using data in diverse ways to effectively optimize business processes
Possess knowledge and understanding of data governance concepts and frameworks
Previous experience with cloud platforms and cloud service providers (e.g., AWS) and cloud solutions/services
Excellent written and verbal communication skills for multiple levels of management
Ability to develop positive and collaborative relationships with business partners and effectively communicate with both business and technology data stakeholders
Excellent organizational skills and a keen attention to detail
Knowledge of specific data attributes of fixed income and derivative instruments preferred
Awareness of the security, privacy and quality requirements for critical data entities
Proficiency with Microsoft Excel and SQL
Tableau, Smart sheets, Alteryx, Python experience preferred
Strong analytical and problem-solving
About Western Asset
At Western Asset we’re saying hello to the future. Committed to being the leading fixed-income investment management firm in the world, we’re investing in new technologies, methodologies and markets. We’re also investing in our people. Our business is guided by a belief in doing the right thing: that if we treat our clients and colleagues with fairness and respect, success will follow. We’re building on our reputation and resources with an entrepreneurial approach that drives innovation. Every day is an opportunity for us to get better by making the most of the possibilities that our people and ideas can bring.,Req ID: 35181
Experience Level: Professional

Come grow with us

At Capital Group, how we work is defined by shared values that include absolute integrity, respect and collaboration. But its more than that. Its smart and highly driven people united in purpose to serve our investors and one another.

Bring your energy and unique perspective to Capital and youll have the opportunity to grow with us professionally, personally, and financially. Youll be part of a team that genuinely cares about helping you succeed. Youll work alongside talented colleagues, many of whom build long careers while progressing through multiple roles, establishing lifelong friendships and making a difference in our communities. In return for your contributions, youll receive premier compensation and benefits, and a company-funded retirement plan that ranks among the most generous.

COVID-19 Hiring: We recognize how challenging it is to start a new role with a new company during this uncertain time. Our HR team and hiring managers are here to support you every step of the way. During the pandemic, weve transitioned to a work-from-home environment until further notice. All of our recruiting and onboarding activities are virtual. We encourage you to discuss Capital Groups response to COVID-19 throughout your recruiting process.

As a Market Data Analyst, youll play a key role in liaising between Capital Group business units and external vendors to obtain the most cost-effective solutions to meet our business needs. Youll manage ongoing vendor relationships, participate and/or help lead negotiations for services. Youll participate in robust product analysis, provide recommendations and solutions, conduct cost benefit analysis, and help with implementation, application support, and training. Youll partner with groups like finance, legal and compliance for budget management, compliance reviews, and data security oversight. Youll be part of a highly specialized team doing impactful work to support our investment professionals and research associates in their process. Youre up for a challenge. Our environment is fast-paced, and no two days are the same.

Qualifications:
You have a bachelors degree in finance, economics, business or relevant field of study and 3 years of experience in financial services.
You have working knowledge in various financial and market data tools such as Bloomberg, FactSet, Morningstar, MSCI, Refinitiv, and S&P.
You have experience in vendor negotiations, billing practices and fee models.
Youve always considered yourself intellectually curious and analytical. You like digging into the numbers, coming up with solutions, and have a keen eye for identifying trends.
You understand the importance of building trusting relationships with groups within and outside of the organization.
You thrive in team settings. You ask great questions, bounce ideas off others, and proactively share your perspective.
Company Overview:
Founded in 1931, Capital Group is one of the worlds largest and most trusted investment management companies and home to the American Funds. We manage more than US$1.7 trillion in assets, and our 7,500 associates make our clients their first priority every day. When we do our job right, millions of investors around the world fulfill their dreams and financial goals, from home ownership and higher education, to a comfortable retirement. Our long-term investment results and outstanding service set us apart from our competitors, while our workplace sets us apart from other employers.

We are an equal opportunity employer, which means we comply with all federal, state and local laws that prohibit discrimination when making all decisions about employment. As equal opportunity employers, our policies prohibit unlawful discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex (including gender and gender identity), pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions, age, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status, sexual orientation, citizenship status, AIDS/HIV status, political activities or affiliations, military or veteran status, status as a victim of domestic violence, assault or stalking or any other characteristic protected by federal, state or local law.

#GD-IG,POSITION INFORMATION
This examination will remain open until LACERA's hiring needs are met, and is subject to closure without prior notice.

EXAMINATION INFORMATION: Examination Number: 9-0457-M, Job Bulletin Number: 20-07

TYPE OF RECRUITMENT: Open Competitive Job Opportunity

The Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association (LACERA) is looking for an experienced Java Developer to join our Member Applications Development Team. This position in the Systems Division requires an experienced developer to fill a role in the continued development of our Pension Administration System (PAS). This System incorporates state of the art enterprise architecture, relational databases, security, system monitoring, document imaging, workflow, and case management.to support LACERA's business goal and strategic plans. The successful candidate will be working in an open collaborative environment to support Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) activities to design/develop/test/debug/integrate/deploy/ maintain front-end, middle-tier, and back-end components of our enterprise PAS.

What we do: LACERA administers and manages the $57+ billion retirement fund for the County of Los Angeles. We provide retirement, disability, and death benefits to eligible County Employees and their beneficiaries, and collect, deposit, invest, and manage retirement funds collected from the County, outside districts, and County employees. LACERA is one of the largest county retirement associations in the United States with over 156,000 members. Our membership is comprised of individuals from a diverse range of careers, age groups, and ethnicity – all contributing to the greater welfare of Los Angeles County. Benefits include health insurance, annual leave, sick leave, retirement, paid holidays, and ride share program.

Benefits include health insurance, annual leave, sick leave, retirement, paid holidays, and ride share program.

LACERA Values: We work together toward achieving our Mission through our shared Values.

Our Values include Professionalism, Respect, Open Communication, Fairness, Integrity, and Teamwork.

ABOUT THE POSITION

This position will be one of the team's lead developers reporting to an Information Technology Manager. This position will work independently as well as collaborates with other developers, business analysts, system administrators, project management, contractors, and other IT technical staff. The position independently designs, develops, tests, and debugs new and existing Java code based on program specifications; analyzes the impact of changes to existing Java components; makes recommendations to improve existing systems and programs; communicates with business analysts, network engineers, and systems management; and follows established configuration/ change management processes.

Vacancy Information: The current vacancy is in the Retirement Systems Division.

Work Schedule: This full-time position is required to work a 5/40 schedule (e.g. an eight (8) hour day, Monday through Friday) for at least the first twelve (12) months of employment.

EXAMPLES OF ESSENTIAL JOB FUNCTIONS
The following examples are intended to describe the general nature and level of work performed by persons assigned to each classification. Depending on the assignment, duties may include, but are not limited to the following:
Analyzes and designs existing and proposed data processing systems which can be programmed and processed by computers, including conducting studies to determine the nature of the problems connected with automated work processes.
Analyzes users requirements as stated in order to define more exactly what is needed, ascertains if sufficient information is available, identifies possible combinations of information or conditions which can affect the system or programming requirements.

Conducts preliminary feasibility studies to advise whether the desired end product can be produced by the computer equipment available.

Identifies the kind of records, files, and documents which are necessary to accomplish the substantive work by computer means.

Performs systems maintenance work in light of changes in legislation, regulations, or other basic requirements.

Develops overall plans to carry out the required processing which indicates what is to be done, by both computers and humans, at each stage in the processing of data.

Prepares related forms, procedures, rules, and instructions to govern the development, transmission, and use of data necessary to achieve the desired work products.

Checks proposed plans, instructions, and procedures with users to insure that systems devised are acceptable to them, makes necessary adjustments to meet or remedy any omissions or deficiencies.

Coordinates the development of test problems and conditions to insure the adequacy of all manual and machine processes included in the system.

Charts or documents the system in the degree of detail required for presentation to management and for programming, participates in trial runs of new or revised systems, and suggests modifications of systems and programs to correct deficiencies involved.

Outlines for programmers the actions to be accomplished by the computer including specifications of the overall program structure in terms of component segments, sub-applications, modules, or machine runs; how these work together to produce the desired end product; and how these differ from actions to be performed by employees.

May be required to perform other duties as assigned.

REQUIREMENTS
SELECTION REQUIREMENTS
Three (3) years of recent progressively responsible full-time experience within the last five (5) years performing coding, testing, and debugging of enterprise Java applications in a centralized IT organization*.
Centralized IT organization is defined by LACERA as that which is responsible, under the direction or guidance of a Chief Information Officer or Chief Technology Officer, for providing comprehensive IT services including analysis, design, acquisition, and/or development, implementation, maintenance, or support of information systems; and in which the work performed is in direct relationship to the IT requirements and initiatives of the overall company or major organization unit.
LICENSE:
A valid California Class C Driver License or the ability to utilize an alternative method of transportation when needed to carry out job-related essential functions.

PHYSICAL CLASS:
2 - Light.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

DESIRABLE QUALIFICATIONS:
Graduation from an accredited college or university with a bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Computer Information systems, or a related field
Experience programming and debugging enterprise Java applications using:
Eclipse based development tools
EJB, JSF, Web Services, XHTML, JavaScript
JBoss or WebSphere
Red Hat Linux
Ant/Cruise Control, Maven, Gradle, Jenkins and/or Team City
Experience testing applications with automated testing tools
Experience developing applications for banking, insurance, and retirement processing
To receive credit for the above desirable qualifications, your application must clearly describe your experience.

Knowledge of: Java application testing and testing tools; Java application servers such as JBoss or WebSphere, Red Hat Linux; Eclipse-based development tools; EJB, JSF, Web Services, XHTML, and JavaScript; Ant/Cruise Control, Maven, Gradle, Jenkins and/or Team City; systems design and concepts; technology trends and innovations; correct English usage, grammar, spelling, punctuation and vocabulary; interpersonal skills using tact, patience, and courtesy; consulting and customer service skills; system design concepts and administration; and Microsoft Office applications including Excel, Outlook, and Word.

Ability to: Write, test, and debug new and existing Java code; troubleshoot or escalate issues; analyze and make recommendations; integrate and support an Eclipse-based development environment; communicate clearly and effectively, orally and in writing; develop and use collaborative relationships to facilitate the accomplishment of work goals; develop and sustain productive relationships with public and staff; understand and follow oral and written directions and established processes; provide leadership; work with minimum supervision; keep current with developments and trends in areas of expertise; learn new skills as needed; establish and maintain effective working relationships with other staff internally and externally; determine the impact of infrastructure changes to applications and take steps to ensure stability and availability; operate a personal computer utilizing Microsoft applications such as Word and Excel; and mentor and train others.

Those applicants, who meet the Selection Requirements AND most closely match the desired qualifications, will be invited to participate in the examination process.

EXAMINATION CONTENT: This selection process will consist of:

Part I: A qualifying evaluation of application information and the desirable qualifications.

Only the highest qualified applicants as determined under Part I, will be invited to continue in the selection process under Part II.

Part II: An Appraisal (Oral) Interview weighted 100%.

The appraisal (oral) interview will assess the applicant's knowledge, experience, and general ability to perform the essential functions of the position.

Those candidates which are determined eligible for hire under the Los Angeles County's Civil Services Rules may be invited to the selection process which may be comprised of a selection interview and/or job related assessments.

CANDIDATES MUST ACHIEVE A PASSING SCORE OF 70 OR HIGHER ON THE WEIGHTED PORTION OF THE EXAMINATION IN ORDER TO BE PLACED ON THE ELIGIBLE REGISTER.

EXAMINATION NOTIFICATIONS: All selection invitations (e.g. oral, performance, written, etc.) and/or special notices will be sent to candidates via email to the email address provided on the official application only. Ensure your email address is correct at the time of filing. Allegations of not receiving the email notification to the email address provided on the official application will not be considered an acceptable reason to authorize an early or late examination administration.

All other notifications (e.g. Notice of non-acceptance, Notice of Results, etc.) will be mailed via United States Postal Services (USPS) to the mailing address provided on the official application. Test scores/results cannot be given over the telephone.

Allegations of not receiving notifications sent via USPS to the mailing address provided on the official application cannot be considered to authorize an extension of appeal rights.

To ensure that our emails are not filtered into your "junk" or "bulk" folder, please add governmentjobs.com and lacera.com to your list of trusted senders.

DO NOT select "Off" under Email Preferences within your profile or click "Unsubscribe" on our notices if you would like LACERA to notify you regarding your application status, test schedules, and other important information pertaining to your candidacy for this position. Moreover, please
add cchan@lacera.com and info@governmentjobs.com to your email address
book and to the list of approved senders to prevent email notifications from being blocked or filtered as spam/junk/clutter email from your email provider.

LACERA will not consider allegations of not receiving the email notification as an acceptable reason to authorize a reschedule or late exam administration.

ELIGIBLE INFORMATION: The names of candidates receiving a passing grade will be placed on the eligible list/register in the order of their score group for a period of six (6) months following the date of promulgation.

APPLICATION AND FILING INFORMATION:

Application must be submitted online. Applicants can check the status of their applications at anytime by logging into their account on www.governmentjobs.com

The acceptance of an employment application depends upon whether or not an applicant has provided adequate information that clearly demonstrates meeting the Selection Requirements for the position as stated above. Please complete the application and supplemental questionnaire thoroughly and completely. Information provided in the supplemental questionnaire must be reflected in the application to be considered.

Failure to provide complete information on the employment application and on the supplemental questionnaire will impact the assessment of an applicant's qualifications and acceptance in the selection process.

Applications submitted without the complete work history and the supplemental questions completed in their entirety will be rejected as incomplete. "See application" or "See resume" or copy and paste of work experience is not sufficient or qualifying responses.

Resumes will not be accepted in lieu of the completed application or supplemental questionnaire.

In the space provided for education, include the names and addresses of schools attended, and number of credits, degree, and/or certificate(s) earned.

In order to receive credit for any college course work, or college degree, such as an Associate, Bachelor, Master, Doctorate degree, or for completion of a certificate program, you must include a legible copy of the official diploma, official and/or unofficial transcripts, or an official letter from the accredited institution which shows the area of specialization or official certificate(s) at the time of filing or within ten (10) business days from application submission date.

Applicants must provide the appropriate attachments during application submission, email the documentation to humanresources@lacera.com, or fax a photocopy of the required documents to (626) 564-6699 within ten (10) business days of filing. Please include the examination title and number on the documentation.

Failure to provide the appropriate documentation may result in your application being rejected as incomplete and will be removed from consideration.

Your employment history should be listed in order beginning with the most recent.

For each job held, provide the name and address of your employer, your job titles, beginning and ending dates, description of work performed, salary earned, and reason for leaving.

If you have worked in more than one position for one employer, list each job title and/or area of assignment separately on the application to demonstrate your experience in various assignments/occupational areas.

Part-time experience will be evaluated on the basis of its fractional equivalent of a 40-hour workweek.

All required experience must be paid.

This position may require working evenings, weekends, and holidays.

TO APPLY ONLINE GO TO: www.lacera.com and click on the Careers link.

Faxed, emailed, or hardcopy (paper) applications will not be accepted.

COMPUTER AND INTERNET ACCESS AT PUBLIC LIBRARIES: For candidates who may not have regular access to a computer or the internet, applications can be completed on computers at public libraries throughout Los Angeles County.

Candidate(s) who complete examination process with acceptable results will be considered by the Department hiring authority. Upon an offer of employment, a comprehensive background investigation will be conducted, which includes verification of experience, and/or education, credit history, and fingerprinting through the California Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

BACKGROUND CHECK: Except for a very limited number of positions, Candidates will not be asked to provide information about conviction history until they receive a contingent offer of employment. LACERA will make an individualized assessment of whether or not a Candidates' Conviction History has a direct or adverse relationship with the specific duties of the job, and consider potential mitigating factors, including but not limited to; evidence and extent of rehabilitation, recency of the offense(s), and age at the time of the offense(s). If asked to provide information about conviction history, any convictions or court records which are exempted by a valid court order do not have to be disclosed.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Please note that all information included in the application materials is subject to verification at any point during the examination and hiring process, including after an appointment has been made. Falsification of any information may result in disqualification or rescission of appointment.

Using verbiage from the Classification Specification, Selection Requirements, and/or Desirable Qualifications serving as your description of duties or responses to the supplemental questions will not be sufficient to demonstrate that you meet the requirements. Doing so may result in your application being incomplete and you may be disqualified. Applications may be rejected at any stage of the examination process.

Requests for accommodation: humanresources@lacera.com
Teletype Telephone: (800) 899-4099
Department Contact Name: Connie Chan
Department Contact Telephone: (626) 564-6000 extension 3580
Department Email: humanresources@lacera.com

The Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association (LACERA) recognizes excellence and performance by providing comprehensive and competitive benefit programs to its employees. Emphasis is directed toward offering you and your family a variety of benefits that help meet your needs and balance your career with your personal life. The main theme of all of the programs is flexibility.

These types of programs are made possible through Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code and allows you to choose between nontaxable benefits, taxable cash and the best plan for you and your family. In addition, the County pays you a monthly "benefit allowance" to pay for these benefits.

LACERA offers three (3) cafeteria benefit plans. Each plan has different benefits and rates.
Options Benefit Plan - for Staff Members represented by SEIU Local 721.
MegaFlex Benefit Plan - for eligible Non-represented Staff Members.
Flexible Benefit Plan - for eligible Non-represented Staff Members.
As a participant of one of the above plans, you may elect the following benefits:

• Medical Coverage

• Dental Coverage

• Group Term Life Insurance

• Accidental Death & Dismemberment Insurance

• Health & Dependent Care Spending Accounts

• Medical Coverage Protection

• Short-Term Disability – for MegaFlex participants only

• Long-Term Disability – for MegaFlex participants only

Part-time employees (except workers in student positions) who work an average of 30 hours or more per week during a period,OverviewThe Data Integrity team is primarily responsible for the creation and stewardship of Security data and analytics calculations for all of Guggenheim Partners Investment Management. The Data Integrity Analyst sits on this team which is part of Operations and based in the Chicago office.Responsibilities* Daily assessment of the Data Integrity Group's suite of quality control reports, including but not limited to: factor and coupon validation, new issuance Bloomberg checks, missing issuers, asset class sector checks, and security ticker check.* Update and recalculate principal and income projections.* Produce monthly external reporting for the Data Integrity Group.* Perform daily NRSRO credit ratings reviews and updates.* Perform daily ESG (Environmental, Social, Governance) ratings reviews and updates.* Monitor security data flow across the risk management system, the portfolio accounting system, the order management system, the option trading system, and the data warehouse to ensure consistent and accurate information is used across the firm.* Review and interpret fixed income analytics, identifying and documenting outliers.* Timely response to queries affecting both the risk management system and the accounting system.* Update and review fixed income cash flows, ensuring that the resulting bond analytics are within reasonable expectations of the portfolio trading desk and trading group.* Consult management on how to develop continued incremental improvement and increased efficiencies across Operations.* Assist other members of the team with special projects and respond to internal/external ad hoc requestsQualifications* Undergraduate degree and at least 1 year of fixed income and/or middle office experience* Thorough understanding of fixed income securities, including structured products* Ability to work on a team to create processes and influence change* Aptitude for quantitative analytics* Demonstrated commitment to teamwork and client service* Communicate and prioritize effectively* Extensive Excel proficiency and knowledge/use of Microsoft products* Completion of the CFA Level 1 exam is a plus, but not requiredWhat You Can Expect From Us* Collaborative environment, with honest and direct interactions* Opportunity to develop, grow, and learn the broader business* Health and wellness programs through comprehensive and competitive benefits package* Modern, conveniently-located facilities* Community and corporate citizenship through volunteer time off and matching gift programsGuggenheim Guiding PrinciplesStewardship, Integrity, Excellence, Innovation, Entrepreneurship, TalentAbout the FirmAbout Guggenheim InvestmentsGuggenheim Investments is the global asset management and investment advisory division of Guggenheim Partners, with expertise in fixed income, equity, and alternative strategies. We focus on the return and risk needs of insurance companies, corporate and public pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments and foundations, consultants, wealth managers, and high-net-worth investors. Our team of investment professionals performs rigorous research to understand market trends and identify undervalued opportunities in areas that are often complex and underfollowed. This approach to investment management has enabled us to deliver innovative strategies providing diversification opportunities and attractive long-term results.,PEAK6 is a leading investment firm headquartered in Chicago. More than 20 years ago, we were one of the first firms to develop sophisticated proprietary technology in our trading business. Today, we leverage our technical ingenuity and operational ability across several investment areas. We cover everything, spanning from early- to mid-stage growth capital, operational control, trading, and sports management while lending an eye and providing value to the customer. Over the years, we have built and operated several leading financial technology firms and today our team includes a digital wealth clearinghouse, an outsource provider of flood insurance, a Premier League soccer team, a value investment arm, an incubation lab, and more.

As a Senior Trading Systems Data Analyst you will provide mission critical support for our cutting-edge trading platform and applications. You'll be responsible for improving our day to day operations while translating trading desk needs into tactical priorities. You'll also be a champion for engineering excellence, assessing and guiding our teams to ensure the that our trading platform and all trading applications are well- documented, observable, monitored, and performant.

You'll Be Responsible For
Providing high quality of service, support and experience for traders, help resolve issues in timely manner.
Troubleshooting complex trading systems issues, improve trackability and quantifying of issue to help prioritize the fixes
Engaging with trading and development teams to collect data, identify patterns to correlate issues
Leveraging and enhance existing tools for monitoring and alerting, help build new tools to proactively identify problems
Partnering with the development teams to get reliability changes scheduled into sprints.
Building dashboards and other tools to enable the goals of the Trading Systems Support Team.
You'll gain loads of experience in this role but before you do, you should have:
3+ years of technical experience supporting traders in a production environment.
A result driven approach with the ability to establish priorities and execute on solutions.
Strong technical problem-solving abilities, with the ability to quickly understand technical systems using a variety of methods. These include, reading code, documentation, logs, and digging into raw data through various interfaces.
2+ years' experience with scripting/troubleshooting in Python or similar languages.
Curiosity and eagerness to learn and improve on existing approaches.
Strong verbal and written communication skills, with the ability to cater your approach to technical and non-technical audiences.
Experience troubleshooting in Linux and SQL.
Knowledge of FIX Protocol is a plus
A BS in CS, EE, CE, or related industry experience.
All of our team members have these traits. You should, too.

Collaboration Grit

Adaptability Ownership

As a PEAK6 Senior Trading Systems Data Analyst you can enjoy:
Generous medical, vision and dental plans
Matching 401(k) programs
Adoption assistance & family leave
Sabbatical program
Massage days
Poker tournament with a grand prize of a World Series of Poker buy in
Sports leagues
Corn hole tournaments
Annual PEAK6 Party
Yoga classes
Tuition reimbursement
Lasik eye discount
Philanthropy events
Annual wellness screens and flu shots
Bagel Fridays/expiration lunches
Birthday gifts
Charitable matching gift program,SUMMARY: Nuveen’s Client Insights & Analytics organization is focused on turbo-charging distribution through data and analytics, the CRM ecosystem, and digital tools to enable sales, service, marketing, and product organizations better meet client needs. We are focused on:
Developing a deep understanding of our business and clients through analytics and customer research to redefine the ‘metrics that matter’ to help establish our distribution model of the future
Building data-driven sales and marketing practices enabled by segmentation and prescriptive modeling to target and serve clients based on their needs and preferences
Enabling the sales, service, and marketing organizations to better meet client needs through activation platforms, inclusive of CRM, marketing automation, and other internal tools
Developing scalable engagement models incorporating digital to enhance our effectiveness, productivity, relevance and return on investment
Expanding digital client facing capabilities to deliver a distinctive omni-channel client experience that seamlessly integrates digital and human interactions
ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: The following duties are generally representative of the nature and level of work assigned and are not necessarily all inclusive.
Collect data from various internal data sources including data manufactured by internal applications and analytics teams
Collect data from various external data sources including data purchased from strategic third-party partners
Enable processes to help ensure the quality of data used by the enterprise to make strategic and tactical decisions
Document the collection, storage, and usage of data across the enterprise, with a special focus on our client data domain
Help identify opportunities to use data to solve enterprise goals
Collaborate with internal technology partners to ensure data is broadly available to internal business groups including sales, marketing, product, and finance
QUALIFICATIONS: To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

EDUCATION and/or EXPERIENCE:
Undergraduate degree from an accredited university or college; degree in a quantitative or technical discipline is preferred
5-7 years of analytical experience, with 3+ years of financial services industry experience preferred
Extensive experience with and strong understanding of relational databases
Experience with cloud-based platforms and data query tools
CRM knowledge preferred
Experience with scrum or other agile methodologies preferred
Experience with working in a cloud-based environment
INTERPERSONAL/COMMUNICATION/LANGUAGE SKILLS:
Personal initiative
Ability to communicate complex information and analysis in written and graphical form
Exceptional interpersonal and communication skills in order to work collaboratively across multiple business units
TECHNICAL SKILLS:
Broad overall technical skill set
Expert SQL (Microsoft T-SQL or similar)
Cloudera Hadoop (Impala or Hive) or similar
Experience with R, Python, .NET, or similar preferred
Experience with Tableau Server and/or Desktop, or similar BI tool

Additional Information



Requisition ID: 1727127,Monitors and manages large volumes of transactions, updates data in systems and performs reconciliations on a daily basis. Assists with various tasks related to deal management. Communicates with internal and external parties, regarding deal-specific items.Required SkillsEducation/Training (or equivalent):* Bachelor's Degree requiredExperience (Type of work experience, minimum number of years):* Minimum 3 years experience in Accounting or FinanceTechnical or Administrative Knowledge:* Highly proficient in Microsoft Suite* Basic Bloomberg knowledge desired* Basic knowledge of securitiesSpecial Skills and/or Abilities:* Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills* Strong verbal and written communication skills* Excellent attention to detail* Exercises independent judgment and multi-task oriented* Takes initiative and ownership of job responsibilities* Must be able to work well in a team environment* Must be able to perform essential job duties accurately and timely* Must adhere to deadlines and targets givenRequired Experience* Prepares daily reconciliation of cash transactions* Manages large volumes of transactions and monitors account balances* Actively researches discrepancies with various agents and clients* Liaison with counterparts to ensure accuracy of transaction flow and follows up on outstanding issues* Proactively and effectively communicates with clients, as needed* Processes and reconciles data in various systems* Works closely with others to resolve issues effectively and timely* Prepares various reports needed by internal employees and handles client requests relating to cash management* Actively monitors securities settlement process and initiates resolution within scope of authority, as needed* Assists in monthly report preparation* Prepares deal hypotheticals, as needed* Other duties as assigned by Management,Data Management and Quantitative Analysis - IC1 Under direct guidance, works with internal and external datasets and client reference data and provides analysis in the development of statistical, financial and/or econometric models for analyzing asset performance, securities data, derivative pricing, risk exposure or other sophisticated concepts. Provides analytical support and prepares drafts of standard and ad hoc reports for assigned area. With general guidance, supports assigned area with basic statistical and quantitative analyses. May perform or oversee data management activities in support of more senior quantitative colleagues. Runs models, looks for exceptions, takes corrective action. Builds knowledge of technology tools used to conduct analyses. Applies techniques such as querying and macro development to extract data for populating models. Builds knowledge of processes and products and which analyses, methodologies and approaches best support assessment of performance, risk, or valuation. Interprets findings and prepares initial drafts of standard reports. No direct reports. Primarily responsible for the accuracy and quality of own work. Work contributes to the achievement of team goals.QualificationsBachelors degree or the equivalent combination of education and experience. Advanced degree in quantitative analysis preferred. 0-3 years experience preferred. Experience in quantitative finance and technology preferred.BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-Texas-HoustonInternal Jobcode: 70128Job: Corporate TrustOrganization: Corporate Trust-HR06320Requisition Number: 2001579,Manages high-profile client relationships in the fixed income market while managing complex structured finance transactions. Assists with advanced duties related to deal management. Communicates effectively with clients and proactively addresses client questions and concerns.

Required Skills

Education/Training (or equivalent):
Bachelor's Degree required
Experience (Type of work experience, minimum number of years):
Minimum 5 years work experience in Accounting or Finance
Technical or Administrative Knowledge:
Highly proficient with Microsoft software
Advanced Excel skills required
Basic Bloomberg knowledge desired
Advanced knowledge of securities
Special Skills and/or Abilities:
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills
Strong verbal and written communication skills
Excellent attention to detail
Exercises independent judgment and multi-task oriented
Takes initiative and ownership of job responsibilities
Must be able to work well in a team environment
Must be able to perform essential job duties accurately and timely
Must adhere to deadlines and targets given
Required Experience
Prepares daily reconciliation of cash transactions
Manages complex structured finance transactions in the fixed income market
Maintains good client relationships with portfolio managers, underwriters, investors, rating agencies and other related third parties to the transactions
Interprets and comprehends complex legal documents that govern structured finance deals
Provides accurate and timely monthly reporting that is in compliance with deal documents
Prepares and analyzes hypothetical transactions according to deal requirements
Proactively manages deals by understanding clients' needs and deal documents
Manages and grows client base by providing excellent quality service that results in repeat business
Works closely with others internally to create and streamline processes and procedures,Data Management and Quantitative Analysis - IC3 Under moderate guidance, works with internal and external datasets and client reference data and provides analysis in the development statistical, financial and/or econometric models for analyzing asset performance, securities data, derivative pricing, risk exposure or other sophisticated concepts. Provides analytical support and prepares drafts of standard and ad hoc reports for assigned area. With moderate guidance, supports assigned area with more advanced statistical and quantitative analyses. Serves as resource to less experienced colleagues. Runs models, looks for exceptions, takes corrective action. Uses technology tools to conduct analyses. Applies techniques such as SQL and querying and macro development to extract data for populating models. Has a good understanding of the relevant processes and products in assigned area and which analyses, methodologies and approaches best support assessment of performance, risk, or valuation. Interprets findings and prepares initial drafts of standard reports. Prepares ad-hoc reports at the request of managers and/or other leaders. Translates complex technical concepts and analyses to non-technical audiences. Reviews accuracy of reports and calculations performed by less experienced colleagues. No direct reports. Provides guidance to more junior analysts. Primarily responsible for the accuracy and quality of own work. Work contributes to the achievement of team goals.QualificationsBachelors degree or the equivalent combination of education and experience. Advanced degree in quantitative analysis preferred. 5-7 years experience preferred. Experience in quantitative finance and technology preferred.BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.Our ambition is to build the best global team - one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve - and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.Primary Location: United States-Texas-HoustonInternal Jobcode: 70126Job: Corporate TrustOrganization: Corporate Trust-HR06320Requisition Number: 2002910,Your Opportunity


Charles Schwab is looking for a candidate excited about technology and looking to join an organization focused on strong customer service. The GDT Assistance in Data (AID) team provides technology solutions and data support for Schwab employees. The AID team is the first point of contact for internal customers with data questions, issues, or requests sourced from our analytic and big data systems. The AID team’s goal is to deliver an exceptional customer experience to maximize Schwab’s ability to leverage data as an asset for competitive advantage. This role is to act as the lead analyst designing the help desk engagement model, processes and tools. This role will also guide other staff members in service completion, process adherence and professional development.

In this newly created strategic role, the ideal candidate will define support process, procedures, and performance metrics whiling learning about our big data and data warehouse ecosystem.

You will have the opportunity to delight Schwab’s internal customers by empowering them with self-service data exploration tools and elevate Schwab’s data IQ level by connecting with end users, providing education opportunities about GDT data assets and delivering customer support services related to their data needs.

What you’re good at
Putting the customer first; empathizing with the customer
Exercising patience during stressful situations
Developing processes/procedures for request intake, triage and assignment, escalation, and communication
Coaching junior team members on processes and service mindset
Strong oral and written communication skills
Having a friendly presence and helpful attitude; strong interpersonal skills and ability to work well with others
Demonstrating professional etiquette in the use of phones, chat, and email
Communicating complex technical issues in an easy to understand manner to customers with minimal technical knowledge
Multi-tasking and using our organizational tools effectively in a constantly changing environment
Executing the defined Service Desk processes with a strong attention to detail
Receiving constructive feedback and demonstrating improvement
Answering incoming requests, tracking information in the IT ticketing system, and resolving requests in a timely manner
Escalating unresolved issues to the proper escalated support team
Troubleshooting basic end user issues on various software applications,
Providing outstanding customer service and follow through on all issues to distributed GDT Team members
Triaging new issues and requests from inbound Service Desk and customer created incidents, providing immediate support according to the escalation process.
Troubleshooting end user query issues
What you have
Working knowledge of Data platforms such as Teradata, and Big Data platforms, Tableau, Collibra, Informatica and Business Objects
Intermediate skills in SQL
Ability to provide remote technical support over chat and phone
Troubleshoot moderate data issues
Strong communication skills
Strong customer focus
Strong trouble shooting & problem solving skills
Minimum 2 year technical development or support experience
Knowledge of Business Intelligence, Data Warehousing and Big Data tools
Bachelor s Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems.
1-4 years of progressive IT support experience.
Background in IT ticketing systems.,The FAS Data and Analytics group has an exciting opportunity for an FAS Data Quality Analyst to join our Data Governance and Quality team! We’re looking data-oriented crew to continue building out the data operations function for FAS data. This is a unique opportunity to partner with our sales channels to understand the sales strategy and ensure that we have best in class data to drive performance and support the channels in making data driven decisions.

Core Responsibilities

1. Engages with internal partners to understand business strategy, questions, and goals. Brings structure to business requests, translates requirements into an analytical project approach, and supports projects through completion.

2. Acquires and compiles structured and unstructured data and verifies its quality, accuracy and reasonableness.

3. Performs analyses of historical data to surface trends and insights using analytical methods.

4. Prepares and delivers visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.

5. May own and manage recurring analytic or reporting processes.

6. Participates in special projects and performs other duties as assigned.

Qualifications
Minimum of three years related work experience.
Undergraduate degree or equivalent combination of training and experience.
Vanguard is not offering visa sponsorship for this position.

About Vanguard

We are Vanguard. Together, we’re changing the way the world invests.

For us, investing doesn’t just end in value. It starts with values. Because when you invest with courage, when you invest with clarity, and when you invest with care, you can get so much more in return. We invest with purpose – and that’s how we’ve become a global market leader. Here, we grow by doing the right thing for the people we serve. And so can you.

We want to make success accessible to everyone. This is our opportunity. Let’s make it count.

Inclusion Statement

Vanguard’s continued commitment to diversity and inclusion is firmly rooted in our culture. Every decision we make to best serve our clients, crew (internally employees are referred to as crew), and communities is guided by one simple statement: “Do the right thing.”

We believe that a critical aspect of doing the right thing requires building diverse, inclusive, and highly effective teams of individuals who are as unique as the clients they serve. We empower our crew to contribute their distinct strengths to achieving Vanguard’s core purpose through our values.

When all crew members feel valued and included, our ability to collaborate and innovate is amplified, and we are united in delivering on Vanguard's core purpose.

Our core purpose: To take a stand for all investors, to treat them fairly, and to give them the best chance for investment success.,CCB Data Support team is a part of the CCB Risk organization and actively supports Fraud Data Analytics, Fraud Modeling, and Risk Reporting activities. In addition, the team partners with the Consumer & Community Banking (CCB) Data Management team to govern the ownership and quality of critical data elements used in reporting and fraud strategies. The role will work with data subject matter experts throughout the business to drive various data initiatives to successful conclusion.A successful candidate in this role will be a person who has a proven track record as a proactive critical thinker, with the ability to manage multiple initiatives. The person needs to work with minimal supervision / independently, be able to analyze data across multiple systems; reconcile differences and drive toward resolving these differences. Person will identify and define key critical data elements, evaluate and make recommendations on data quality rules consistent with the risk of the data element; analyze data usage within the business; and manage tactical and strategic data solutions. Key requirements for this role include: an understanding of technology and systems flow and controls, the ability to drive change and improve processes, organization and documentation, and the ability to effectively interface with business and technology partners.Responsibilities include:* Manage quality assurance of the data, including strategic implementation of data quality rules and review of ongoing data quality alerts* Manage evergreen process supporting data quality initiative such as when data elements are added / modified for new rules or new reports* Conduct data analysis across different systems and reconcile differences. Identify issues in data and working with technology partners to drive toward resolution* Works directly and support end users and data subject-matter experts* Manage and support key Fraud Risk Roadmap projects as it relates to dataQualifications:* Bachelor's degree in related field or sufficient relative experience* Background (minimum of two years) in Technology Development/Support or Data Analytics, or Process Analysis/Process Improvement* Experience with Consumer Banking systems and processes is preferred, especially those related to Digital and Fraud* Good understanding of operational and regulatory risk management* Must be able to think critically, understand business and technical functions and assess impact, identify root causes of issues, solve problems creatively, plan and meet deadlines, and demonstrate strong sense of personal accountability* Previous experiences using SQL and with database such as ORACLE, TERADATA etc. Some experience with SAS would be useful, but not required Strong relationship skills* Highly detail-oriented* Polished verbal and written communication skills* Excellent research and analytical skills* Strong MS Office suite skills (Excel, Word, PowerPoint, Project)* Prior experiences with Agile methodology is useful.,In Vanguard's Client Experience & Digital (CXD) department, our goal is to evolve and enhance our client’s digital experiences. In this technical, data analytics role you will be a key team member that uncovers insights and deepens understanding of our investors needs and experiences. You will design experiments, wrangle and interrogate data, evaluate tests with statistical rigor, assesses trends and develops actionable insights and recommendations in support of business objectives. You will support and train junior analysts.

Core Responsibilities
Engages with internal partners to understand business strategy, questions and goals. Brings structure to business requests, translates requirements into an analytical project approach, and leads projects through completion. Delegates tasks and provides tactical and strategic guidance to peers.
Designs experiments & appropriate measurement plans to test appropriate hypotheses.
Acquires and compiles structured and unstructured data and verifies its quality, accuracy and reasonableness.
Performs analyses of historical data to surface trends and insights using advanced analytical methods. Validates analytical techniques employed by other analysts.
Prepares and delivers visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.
Develops, owns and manages recurring analytic or reporting processes.
Mentors, coaches, trains, and develops junior data analysts. Proactively expands knowledge of business and analytics and shares with team members. Shares and documents best practices.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties as assigned.
Qualifications
Minimum of five years related work experience in a quantitative role.
Undergraduate degree or equivalent combination of training and experience. Master's level preferred.
Experienced with SQL in a business setting to query data.
Experienced with Python, R, SAS, or other advanced programming language.
About Vanguard

We are Vanguard. Together, we’re changing the way the world invests.

For us, investing doesn’t just end in value. It starts with values. Because when you invest with courage, when you invest with clarity, and when you invest with care, you can get so much more in return. We invest with purpose – and that’s how we’ve become a global market leader. Here, we grow by doing the right thing for the people we serve. And so can you.

We want to make success accessible to everyone. This is our opportunity. Let’s make it count.

Inclusion Statement

Vanguard’s continued commitment to diversity and inclusion is firmly rooted in our culture. Every decision we make to best serve our clients, crew (internally employees are referred to as crew), and communities is guided by one simple statement: “Do the right thing.”

We believe that a critical aspect of doing the right thing requires building diverse, inclusive, and highly effective teams of individuals who are as unique as the clients they serve. We empower our crew to contribute their distinct strengths to achieving Vanguard’s core purpose through our values.

When all crew members feel valued and included, our ability to collaborate and innovate is amplified, and we are united in delivering on Vanguard's core purpose.

Our core purpose: To take a stand for all investors, to treat them fairly, and to give them the best chance for investment success.,Details:

Core Responsibilities
Engages with internal partners to understand business strategy, questions and goals. Brings structure to business requests, translates requirements into an analytical project approach, and leads projects through completion. Delegates tasks and provides tactical and strategic guidance to peers.
Acquires and compiles structured and unstructured data and verifies its quality, accuracy and reasonableness.
Designs experiments, develops measurement plans, and tests hypotheses.
Performs analyses of historical data to surface trends and insights using advanced analytical methods.
Prepares and delivers visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.
Develops, owns, and manages recurring analytic or reporting processes.
Mentors, coaches, trains, and develops junior analysts. Proactively expands knowledge of business and analytics and shares with team members. Develops and documents best practices.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties as assigned.
Qualifications
Undergraduate degree (BA/BS) in an analytic/quantitative field. Master’s degree preferred.
A minimum of 3+ years of relevant professional experience in a data analysis role.
Experience querying data with SQL and programming with Python, R, or SAS.
Experience leading, designing and implementing marketing or digital experimentation (A/B or MVT) to improve marketing performance or improve the client experience.
About Vanguard

We are Vanguard. Together, we’re changing the way the world invests.

For us, investing doesn’t just end in value. It starts with values. Because when you invest with courage, when you invest with clarity, and when you invest with care, you can get so much more in return. We invest with purpose – and that’s how we’ve become a global market leader. Here, we grow by doing the right thing for the people we serve. And so can you.

We want to make success accessible to everyone. This is our opportunity. Let’s make it count.

Inclusion Statement

Vanguard’s continued commitment to diversity and inclusion is firmly rooted in our culture. Every decision we make to best serve our clients, crew (internally employees are referred to as crew), and communities is guided by one simple statement: “Do the right thing.”

We believe that a critical aspect of doing the right thing requires building diverse, inclusive, and highly effective teams of individuals who are as unique as the clients they serve. We empower our crew to contribute their distinct strengths to achieving Vanguard’s core purpose through our values.

When all crew members feel valued and included, our ability to collaborate and innovate is amplified, and we are united in delivering on Vanguard's core purpose.

Our core purpose: To take a stand for all investors, to treat them fairly, and to give them the best chance for investment success.,Position Description:

Summary:

We are looking for someone who can work with large datasets, comfortable querying in relational database management systems or business intelligence tools. The individual in this role should be proficient in Excel (intermediate or higher) where they can work with multiple criteria lookups, nested logical/IF formulas, basic knowledge of array formulas and how it works, data cleansing, and pivot tables. They will be responsible for monitoring KPIs and gathering necessary information and data to provide various analysis for call center needs. Must be able to identify and expedite issues through the proper channels. Working knowledge of SAS or SQL or Qlikview is highly valued.

Hours of Work: Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. - 6 p.m.

Essential Job Functions:
Provide intraday, daily, weekly, and monthly reporting and analysis on KPIs to further illustrate performance.
Analyze & report on key call center metrics to gauge trends and forecast performance.
Determines financial performances by comparing and analyzing forecasts and budget with actual results.
Prepare monthly performance reporting by division/department showing financial impact.
Performs compensation analysis, calculate variable compensation for different departments within call center according to the plans, benchmarking and administration of various compensation processes
Assist with the development and maintenance of compensation data, tables, and other related processes
Deliver compensation analysis providing insight and analysis on trends to drive more informed business decisions
Be able to explain pay differences found and partner with other teams on approach to address concerns
Identify major incidents as they happen and work with business partners to address and correct them.
Track events that will either hinder or increase KPIs.
Work with leaders to effectively deploy and analyze initiatives.
Create and maintain documentation regarding all analysis and reporting.
Support the creation of strategic initiatives in a fast paced environment with rigorous statistical analysis
Supervisory Responsibilities:

This job has no supervisory responsibilities.

Qualifications:

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential function satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required.
1-3 years’ experience in Analytics, preferably in a fast-paced call center environment.
Bachelor’s degree preferred in analytics, statistics, finance, or any analytical or engineering related fields, and/or 2 plus years relevant work experience.
Proficiency with financial modeling and data analysis
Ability to analyze quantitative and qualitative information and translate into strategic deliverables
Proficiency with Microsoft Office tools (Excel, PowerPoint, Word etc.)
Ability and willingness to learn new software applications.
Skills in complex problem solving, judgment, critical thinking and decision making.
Ability to be highly organized with an emphasis on accuracy and timeliness.
Ability to organize information and have attention to detail and accurately follow procedures.
Ability to work alone with minimum supervision and with others in a team environment, occasionally under time pressure and on several tasks at the same time.
Ability to effectively communicate orally and in writing with co-workers, management team, and other departments within the organization.
Desired skills but not necessary:
Working knowledge of SAS, SQL, Power BI, SAP Business Objects or similar relational databases.
Demonstrate analytical skills in data mining, data manipulation, report development and visualization
Prior Project Management experience a plus
Knowledge of the mortgage industry
#CB
#GD
#LI-BH1

Founded in Mount Laurel, NJ in 1990, Freedom Mortgage has since grown into one of the largest and fastest-growing privately owned full-service residential lenders in the USA. Licensed in all 50 states, Washington D.C., Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, Freedom Mortgage has over 5000 employees nationwide, proudly servicing $225.6 billion, and is still growing.

Our mission is to foster homeownership in America. Freedom is a leader in VA mortgage lending and is one of the mortgage industry’s largest philanthropic supporters of the USO and military families through its Team Freedom Cares philanthropic arm.

Locations include suburban Philadelphia and Fishers, IN, two regions where we were named Top Workplaces. We also have large operating centers countrywide, including these desirable markets: Beaverton , OR; Boca Raton, FL; Columbia, MD; Jacksonville, FL; Melville, NY; Plano, TX; San Dimas, CA; Tempe, AZ; Troy, MI and Woodbridge, VA.

If you seek a sense of community, top training, opportunity for advancement, a comprehensive benefits package and reward and recognition program, look no further.

Freedom Mortgage Corporation is an Equal Opportunity Employer committed to workforce diversity. Qualified applicants will receive consideration without regard to age, race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, or their status as a protected veteran or an individual with disabilities. Local applicants encouraged to apply. Employment contingent upon successful completion of background investigation. Smoke-free workplace. Drug-free work environment. Excellent benefits package including medical, dental, vision and 401(k). All resumes are held in confidence. Only candidates whose profiles closely match requirements will be contacted during this search. LENDER NMLS ID:2767

Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Disabled/Veterans,ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Elicit requirements from the stakeholders, create Functional Specification and Data Mapping documents

Contribute to the analysis, design, build and implementation of processes associated with Data Management and Reporting Environments

Evaluate user requests for enhancements to existing processes and perform the feasibility/GAP analysis prior to implementation

Create Standard Operating Procedure documentation for production processes

Collaborate with the development team and business users to address issues identified during UAT and ensure that corrective actions are taken by the development team to resolve the issues

Create and review QA/UAT testing plan and test scripts

Perform ad-hoc data queries in response to critical business needs using T-SQL/PL-SQL

Participate in Joint Application Development sessions with the business users and developers

Create and maintain documentation related to data sources, data base objects, data movement and reports within the Corporate Analytics data and reporting environments

DESIRED SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE

In-depth knowledge of the mortgage industry

Highly motivated, self-directed and results driven. Ability to perform job functions in an independent manner

Strong communication, interpersonal and presentation skills

Demonstrated ability to work in teams and build collaborative relationships

Experience operating in a complex and changing environment

MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS

Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration, Computer Science or a related field

Minimum of 5+ years of demonstrated experience as a business analyst/ business systems analyst

Experience with Microsoft Business Intelligence Suite (SSRS and Power BI) and ability to write queries in TSQL

Experience in implementation of control and reconciliation reports

Proficiency with Microsoft Office tools (Access, Excel, PowerPoint and Visio)

Ability to analyze and comprehend complex data

Solid time management skills with the ability to organize and prioritize multiple tasks at the same time

#CB

SUMMARY

The Business Systems Analyst within the Corporate Analytics division reports directly to the Director of Data Management and is responsible for the creation and maintenance of Business System Requirements, Functional Requirements, Non-Functional Requirements and the Requirements Traceability Matrix

The Business Systems Analyst will also be responsible for performing data analysis, documentation of data dictionaries/processes and creation of data flow/UML diagrams,Client Experience & Digital (CXD) is hiring talented analysts! We are looking for passionate crew who want to leverage the power of analytics to drive improvements to the client experience. In CXD we are organized around journey labs: cross-functional teams that operate in an enduring product ownership model. Each lab owns a particular journey (experience) and seeks to drive continuous improvement.

As a journey analyst in CXD, you will:
Collaborate with software development, user experience, journey ownership, and other disciplines.
Identify and prioritize areas of greatest opportunity to deliver enhancements.
Visualize and tell compelling stories with data.
Measure how newly developed features have impacted the client experience.
Strong candidates will have demonstrated an ability to:
Work in an ambiguous environment and adapt quickly to change.
Independently translate a broad business objective into a set of incremental analytical deliverables.
Learn new technical skills quickly; our analytics tool stack is ever-changing.
Communicate effectively and show flexibility in style based on the audience.
To learn more about CXD, visit our site on SharePoint.

Core Responsibilities
Engages with internal partners to understand business strategy, questions and goals. Brings structure to business requests, translates requirements into an analytical project approach, and leads projects through completion. Delegates tasks and provides tactical and strategic guidance to peers.
Acquires and compiles structured and unstructured data and verifies its quality, accuracy and reasonableness.
Designs experiments, develops measurement plans, and tests hypotheses.
Performs analyses of historical data to surface trends and insights using advanced analytical methods.
Prepares and delivers visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.
Develops, owns, and manages recurring analytic or reporting processes.
Mentors, coaches, trains, and develops junior analysts. Proactively expands knowledge of business and analytics and shares with team members. Develops and documents best practices.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties as assigned.
Qualifications
Undergraduate degree (BA/BS) in an analytic/quantitative field. Master’s degree preferred.
A minimum of 3+ years of relevant professional experience in a data analysis role.
Experience querying data with SQL and programming with Python, R, or SAS.
Experience leading, designing and implementing marketing or digital experimentation (A/B or MVT) to improve marketing performance or improve the client experience.
Special Factor

Vanguard is not offering visa sponsorship for this position.

About Vanguard

We are Vanguard. Together, we’re changing the way the world invests.

For us, investing doesn’t just end in value. It starts with values. Because when you invest with courage, when you invest with clarity, and when you invest with care, you can get so much more in return. We invest with purpose – and that’s how we’ve become a global market leader. Here, we grow by doing the right thing for the people we serve. And so can you.

We want to make success accessible to everyone. This is our opportunity. Let’s make it count.

Inclusion Statement

Vanguard’s continued commitment to diversity and inclusion is firmly rooted in our culture. Every decision we make to best serve our clients, crew (internally employees are referred to as crew), and communities is guided by one simple statement: “Do the right thing.”

We believe that a critical aspect of doing the right thing requires building diverse, inclusive, and highly effective teams of individuals who are as unique as the clients they serve. We empower our crew to contribute their distinct strengths to achieving Vanguard’s core purpose through our values.

When all crew members feel valued and included, our ability to collaborate and innovate is amplified, and we are united in delivering on Vanguard's core purpose.

Our core purpose: To take a stand for all investors, to treat them fairly, and to give them the best chance for investment success.,Position Description:

The Data Governance Analyst is a high visibility position within Freedom Mortgage’s Data Governance organization and is responsible for supporting the enterprise-wide data governance program. This position requires both a strong understanding of data governance policies, standards and processes as well as proven technical expertise related to data warehousing, data analytics, and data quality software. The position will collaborate with data owners, data stewards, business users and Data Management team members and IT support staff on the adoption and ongoing implementation of data governance policies, best practices across the organization and remediation of the data quality issues.

Roles and Responsibilities
Engage data owners and stewards, business users, and the data management team to ensure Data Governance and Quality processes are implemented and managed, including updating and maintaining documentation, identifying and documenting critical data elements, preparing and managing business and technical metadata, defining data quality thresholds, and the identifying and triaging data integrity issues.
Responsible for the administration of data governance and quality software, maintaining a corporate data dictionary, ensuring data quality standards are met.
Organizes, coordinates and assists cross-functional teams in planning, development, and execution of Data Governance oriented business processes at the operational level.
Measure progress against data definition and quality performance targets, following up with business representatives as necessary.
Maintain data governance processes and controls by working with project and business leaders to analyze the impact of future changes on critical data and mitigate any potential risks to data quality.
Builds dashboards and reporting to ensure proper communicate of the Data Governance program

Position Requirements:
Bachelor's Degree; computer science, software engineering, information systems or a related technical discipline preferred.
At least 2 years of experience in a Data Governance, Data Management or data centric role.
At least 3 years of experience with SQL development, data analysis and reporting
At least 2 years of experience in Project life cycle activities on development and maintenance projects. Create a detailed project management plan and other project documents. Set milestones and deadlines and Manage project resources to Assign, prioritize, and supervise project tasks
Ability to perform root cause analysis and make recommendations for the remediation of data governance and quality issues.
Must be self-directed and have excellent initiative and organization skills.
Experience in banking or mortgage industry is preferred.
Ability to work effectively in a team environment and translate business needs into functional and/or technical requirements to meet the needs of the enterprise.
Knowledge and understanding of data governance and data quality and how they affect business decisions.
Ability to extract and analyze data via SQL.
Experience with business intelligence tools such as (but not limited to) Tableau, Qlik or Power BI.
Proficient in data profiling techniques and tools.
Proven skills with Microsoft Office suite, especially Excel and Access required
Personal initiative to find opportunities, lead change, improve processes and solve problems
Proven ability to collaborate with business data SME’s throughout the organization.
Proven track record of meeting commitments with the highest standards of ethics and integrity
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
#CB

Founded in Mount Laurel, NJ in 1990, Freedom Mortgage has since grown into one of the largest and fastest-growing privately owned full-service residential lenders in the USA. Licensed in all 50 states, Washington D.C., Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, Freedom Mortgage has over 5000 employees nationwide, proudly servicing $225.6 billion, and is still growing.

Our mission is to foster homeownership in America. Freedom is a leader in VA mortgage lending and is one of the mortgage industry’s largest philanthropic supporters of the USO and military families through its Team Freedom Cares philanthropic arm.

Locations include suburban Philadelphia and Fishers, IN, two regions where we were named Top Workplaces. We also have large operating centers countrywide, including these desirable markets: Beaverton , OR; Boca Raton, FL; Columbia, MD; Jacksonville, FL; Melville, NY; Plano, TX; San Dimas, CA; Tempe, AZ; Troy, MI and Woodbridge, VA.

If you seek a sense of community, top training, opportunity for advancement, a comprehensive benefits package and reward and recognition program, look no further.

Freedom Mortgage Corporation is an Equal Opportunity Employer committed to workforce diversity. Qualified applicants will receive consideration without regard to age, race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, or their status as a protected veteran or an individual with disabilities. Local applicants encouraged to apply. Employment contingent upon successful completion of background investigation. Smoke-free workplace. Drug-free work environment. Excellent benefits package including medical, dental, vision and 401(k). All resumes are held in confidence. Only candidates whose profiles closely match requirements will be contacted during this search. LENDER NMLS ID:2767

Equal Opportunity Employer- Minorities/Females/Disabled/Veterans,Position Requirements: Education and Experience:
Sr level experience in a Data Governance, Data Management or Data Centric role.
Data analysis techniques and tools (i.e. SQL, Python, R).
Business intelligence tools such (i.e. Tableau, Qlik or Power BI).
Data profiling techniques and tools.
Experience in the mortgage industry or related field is a plus.
Strong knowledge of industry leading data quality and data protection management practices and tools.
Ability to work effectively in a team environment and translate business needs into functional and/or technical requirements to meet the needs of the enterprise.
Strong knowledge and understanding of data governance and data quality and how they affect business decisions.
Ability to design and recommend governance structures and control frameworks for the ongoing management of data.
Ability to perform root cause analysis and make recommendations for the remediation of data governance and quality issues.
Proven skills with Microsoft Office suite, especially Excel and Access required
Personal initiative to find opportunities, lead change, improve processes and solve problems
Proven ability to collaborate with business data SMEs throughout the organization.
Proven track record of meeting commitments with the highest standards of ethics and integrity
Must be self-directed and have excellent initiative and organization skills.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
#CB

The Senior BA (Data Quality) is a high visibility position within Freedom Mortgages Data Governance organization and is responsible for supporting the enterprise-wide data governance program. This position requires both a strong understanding of data governance policies, standards and processes as well as proven technical expertise related to data warehousing, data analytics, and data quality software. The position will collaborate with data owners, data stewards, business users and Data Management team members on the adoption and ongoing implementation of data governance policies and best practices across the organization

Roles and Responsibilities

Engage data owners and stewards, business users, and the data management team to ensure Data Governance and Quality processes are implemented and managed, including updating and maintaining documentation, identifying and documenting critical data elements, preparing and managing business and technical metadata, defining data quality thresholds, and the identifying and triaging data integrity issues.
Responsible for the administration of data governance and quality software, maintaining a corporate data dictionary, ensuring data quality standards are met.
Organizes, coordinates and assists cross-functional teams in planning, development, and execution of Data Governance oriented business processes at the operational level.
Measure progress against data definition and quality performance targets, following up with business representatives as necessary.
Maintain data governance processes and controls by working with project and business leaders to analyze the impact of future changes on critical data and mitigate any potential risks to data quality.
Builds enterprise dashboards and reporting to ensure proper communicate of the Data Governance program performance.
Act as a change agent with a capacity to successfully measure progress.
Proven skills with Microsoft Office suite, especially Excel and Access required
Personal initiative to find opportunities, lead change, improve processes and solve problems
Proven ability to collaborate with business data SMEs throughout the organization.
Proven track record of meeting commitments with the highest standards of ethics and integrity
Must be self-directed and have excellent initiative and organization skills.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.,Data Transfer, Integration and Quality Analysis - IC2Under moderate direction, analyzes, reconciles, troubleshoots and reviews incoming and outgoing data to ensure accurate performance/output generated by organization technology products and solutions. Tests data quality and confirms findings and conclusions with more senior team members. Communicates with outside vendors to confirm they have all necessary information.

Analyzes and monitors data/reports to ensure quality of and accurate transfer, integration, translation, and reporting of data, reacting promptly to data quality statistics and client inquiries.

Based on both documented processes and experiential analysis, executes simple to moderately complex data fixes, resulting in improved performance or accuracy.

Executes test plans and ensures the quality and accurate delivery/transfer of test and production files.

Builds domain and product knowledge through assisting colleagues and frequent interaction with technology developers, product teams, relationship/account managers, etc.

No direct reports. Provides guidance to less experienced colleagues as needed.

Contributes to the achievement of team objectives.Experience in securities or financial services preferred. Experience with pulse data, regression analysis, Python preferred.
Qualifications
Bachelors degree or the equivalent combination of education and experience is required. Advanced/graduate degree preferred. 3-5 years of total work experience preferred. Experience in securities or financial services preferred.
BNY Mellon is an Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.
Minorities/Females/Individuals With Disabilities/Protected Veterans.
Our ambition is to build the best global team one that is representative and inclusive of the diverse talent, clients and communities we work with and serve and to empower our team to do their best work. We support wellbeing and a balanced life, and offer a range of family-friendly, inclusive employment policies and employee forums.

Primary Location: United States-Delaware-Wilmington
Internal Jobcode: 70140
Job: Operations
Organization: TSO Operations-HR06259
Requisition Number: 2007417,MORE ABOUT THIS JOB

Goldman Sachs Technology Risk is leading threat, risk analysis and data science initiativesthat are helping to protect the firm and our clients from information and cyber security risks. Our team equips the firm with the knowledge and tools to measure risk, identify and mitigate threats and protect against unauthorized disclosure of confidential information for our clients, internal business functions, and our extended supply chain.SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM (SIRT) supports and enables a comprehensive technical Cyber Defense program for the firm while increasing awareness of current and potential Cyber Threats. Works across the organization to operate efficiently, provide technicalinvestigative support and mitigate threats to the firm.Business Unit Overview Led by the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Technology Risk secures Goldman Sachs against hackers and other cyber threats. We are responsible for detecting and preventing attempted cyber intrusions against the firm, helping the firm develop more secure applications and infrastructure, developing software in support of our efforts, measuring cybersecurity risk, and designing and driving implementation of cybersecurity controls. The team has global presence across the Americas, APAC, India and EMEA. Within Technology Risk, The Security Incident Response Team (SIRT) identifies malicious activity, manages the lifecycle of vulnerabilities within GS technologies, and investigates and manages threats across the firm. We are a team of security, software, and product engineers that allow the firm to respond appropriately to firm risks through the use of detection model, security architecture, and cutting-edge cyber threat analysis to manage internal and external threats against the firm. Role In this role, you will be responsible for the creation of data science solutions to extract key signals from cyber security data sources. You will work with data science and machine learning technologies to design, test and deliver world class models that decrease cyber security risk. The ideal candidate should have experience in applying statistics, building and testing models and working with big data solutions in a distributed computing environment. Experience with programming languages including Java, Python, R,& SQL. Candidates will be able to convey complicated technical analysis to senior management via investigation synopses, graphical depictions of attacks, and comprehensive presentations.

RESPONSIBILITIES AND QUALIFICATIONS

HOW YOU WILL FULFILL YOUR POTENTIAL• Responsible for the creation of innovative methodologies for extracting key parameters from big data originating from various sensors.• Utilize expertise in machine learning, statistical data analytics, and predictive analytics to help implement analytics tied to cyber security and hunting methodologies and applications• Design, develop, test and deliver complex analytics in a range of programming environments on large data sets• Apply latest technologies in machine learning, data mining, and predictive analytics to correlate the big datasets and events, and derive dynamic cybersecurity rules.• Generate highly accurate and near real-time security alerts based on the dynamic rules. Collaborate with a global team to continually operate and improve a world-class cyber program by driving the uplift of sensory tools, detection tuning, and access to data sources to increase detection effectiveness by applying data analytics.SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE WE ARE LOOKING FOR• Strong English verbal and written communication skills.• Ability to multi-task and prioritize work effectively.• Highly motivated self-starter who can provide thought leadership in big data analytics.• Responsive to challenging tasks• Ability to document and explain technical details in a concise and understandable manner.• Strong sense of ownership and driven to manage tasks to completion.• Minimum 3 years full time work and post graduate work experience• 3 - 5 years' experience with scalable distributed data processing, management, and visualization tools (e.g. Hadoop, Apache Spark, etc.).• Proven knowledge of industry leading scripting tools such as Python, Powershell, R and SQLPreferred Qualifications• Bachelor of Science in Computer Science, System/Computer Engineering, Data Science and Machine Learning, Cyber-Security, or Information Security is preferred.• Four (4) years of additional work experience may be substituted in lieu of a Bachelor's Degree. Bachelors of Science/Arts in Forensic Computing, System/Computer Engineering, Data Science, Engineering, Operations Research, or Decision Science will be considered.• Strong mathematical background (linear algebra, probability and statistics).• Previous work experience in Cyber Security field is a plus.• Excellent oral, written, and presentation communication skills required.

ABOUT GOLDMAN SACHS

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals. Founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in New York and maintains offices in all major financial centers around the world. Â© The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., 2020. All rights reserved Goldman Sachs is an equal employment/affirmative action employer Female/Minority/Disability/Vet.,SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM (SIRT) supports and enables a comprehensive technical Cyber Defense program for the firm while increasing awareness of current and potential Cyber Threats. Works across the organization to operate efficiently, provide technical investigative support and mitigate threats to the firm.

Business Unit Overview
Led by the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Technology Risk secures Goldman Sachs against hackers and other cyber threats. We are responsible for detecting and preventing attempted cyber intrusions against the firm, helping the firm develop more secure applications and infrastructure, developing software in support of our efforts, measuring cybersecurity risk, and designing and driving implementation of cybersecurity controls. The team has global presence across the Americas, APAC, India and EMEA. Within Technology Risk, The Security Incident Response Team (SIRT) identifies malicious activity, manages the lifecycle of vulnerabilities within GS technologies, and investigates and manages threats across the firm. We are a team of security, software, and product engineers that allow the firm to respond appropriately to firm risks through the use of detection model, security architecture, and cutting-edge cyber threat analysis to manage internal and external threats against the firm.
Role
In this role, you will be responsible for the creation of data science solutions to extract key signals from cyber security data sources. You will work with data science and machine learning technologies to design, test and deliver world class models that decrease cyber security risk. The ideal candidate should have experience in applying statistics, building and testing models and working with big data solutions in a distributed computing environment. Experience with programming languages including Java, Python, R,& SQL. Candidates will be able to convey complicated technical analysis to senior management via investigation synopses, graphical depictions of attacks, and comprehensive presentations.

Job Responsibilities
• Responsible for the creation of innovative methodologies for extracting key parameters from big data originating from various sensors.
• Utilize expertise in machine learning, statistical data analytics, and predictive analytics to help implement analytics tied to cyber security and hunting methodologies and applications
• Design, develop, test and deliver complex analytics in a range of programming environments on large data sets
• Apply latest technologies in machine learning, data mining, and predictive analytics to correlate the big datasets and events, and derive dynamic cybersecurity rules.
• Generate highly accurate and near real-time security alerts based on the dynamic rules. Collaborate with a global team to continually operate and improve a world-class cyber program by driving the uplift of sensory tools, detection tuning, and access to data sources to increase detection effectiveness by applying data analytics.

Basic Qualifications
• Strong English verbal and written communication skills.
• Ability to multi-task and prioritize work effectively.
• Highly motivated self-starter who can provide thought leadership in big data analytics.
• Responsive to challenging tasks
• Ability to document and explain technical details in a concise and understandable manner.
• Strong sense of ownership and driven to manage tasks to completion.
• Minimum 3 years full time work and post graduate work experience
• 3 - 5 years’ experience with scalable distributed data processing, management, and visualization tools (e.g. Hadoop, Apache Spark, etc.).
• Proven knowledge of industry leading scripting tools such as Python, Powershell, R and SQL

Preferred Qualifications
• Bachelor of Science in Computer Science, System/Computer Engineering, Data Science and Machine Learning, Cyber-Security, or Information Security is preferred.
• Four (4) years of additional work experience may be substituted in lieu of a Bachelor’s Degree. Bachelors of Science/Arts in Forensic Computing, System/Computer Engineering, Data Science, Engineering, Operations Research, or Decision Science will be considered.
• Strong mathematical background (linear algebra, probability and statistics).
• Previous work experience in Cyber Security field is a plus.
• Excellent oral, written, and presentation communication skills required.
#techriskcybersecurity

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals. Founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in New York and maintains offices in all major financial centers around the world.

Â© The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., 2020. All rights reserved Goldman Sachs is an equal employment/affirmative action employer Female/Minority/Disability/Vet.,Financial Additions has partnered with a lead international Insurance company in Dallas, TX in search of a Data Analyst.

Data Analyst Responsibilities:
Use statistical methods to analyze data and generate useful business reports
Work with management team to create a prioritized list of needs for each business segment
Identify and recommend new ways to save money by streamlining business processes
Use data to create models that depict trends in the customer base and the consumer population as a whole
Work with departmental managers to outline the specific data needs for each business method analysis project
Data Analyst Qualifications:
Proven working experience in Data mining and Data Analyst role
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining and segmentation techniques
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
BS in Mathematics, Economics, Computer Science, Information Management or Statistics
#INDD,Position Summary: The Data Systems analyst will report in to a newly formed specialized group called the Rapid Response team. This team will be part of the US Branded Cards Control team and will be focused on evaluating impacts, universe, and sizing of significant/regulatory issues that arise. The objective is to quickly assess and identify customer impacts and ensure remediation is completed promptly with the appropriate detailed documentation required by Internal Audit and the Regulators. Along with daily responsibilities the candidate will provide focused support to on-going and future remediation efforts affecting existing and former Citi Credit Card holders. Candidate will work as part of a cross-functional team to provide data and information to, and in receipt from, internal systems as well as external vendors to ensure compliance with all regulatory updates, reporting and long-term data storage. Cultivate and support a sustainable and repeatable control environment by continuing to improve identified opportunities; This role will be required to assist the Senior Data Systems analyst drive a customer remediation to completion including execution and validation Develop new and enhance existing controls and monitoring to demonstrate oversight within the 1st line of defense Support 2nd and 3rd lines of defense planning/prep sessions, remediation plans, and formal responses. Support current Specialized Data Analytics (SDA) with existing workloads and development of new ongoing monitoring required by identified issue resolution. Key Responsibilities: The role Senior Data Systems analyst Candidate should have knowledge of source system data and be able to migrate required data sources to the in- house system Interrogate and analyze data to provide technical solutions and/or repeatable analysis Be able to take complex data sets and determine population Identification and associated calculations related to customer remediations Candidate will be required to process incoming and outgoing data through ETL (Exchange Transaction Load) Work closely with remediation execution teams to validate data veracity post calculation Challenge preconceived notions about data to ensure no stone is left unturned to identify complete universe of impacted customers is uncovered. Create comprehensive documentation that conforms to OCC Remediation Procedures as well as IA validation requirements Partner with Internal Audit on post-validation activities to provide responses to follow up questions regarding output Create procedures and ARCMs as needed related to new processes or methodologies created for remediations Will also work with Specialized Data Analytics (part of same group) and remediation teams which supports the in-house system and transactional monitoring arm, including systems support. Comply with records management policies Qualifications: Experience and knowledge of MS SQL, T SQL, at an enterprise management level Experience with IBS, First Data, host mainframe and working with Network Data Mover (NDM), Dial, Cobol. Knowledge of master files and ability to move very large data sets Experience in Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW), SAS and Oracle preferred 6-10 years of financial, banking, accounting or auditing experience Critical, quick, detail-oriented thinker with strong analytic acumen. Challenges status quo. Strong sense of accountability and ownership, with strong results orientation. Cooperation and focus in achieving group and business objectives. Ability to work autonomously, take initiative, and prioritize effectively. Strong proficiency in MS Office including Excel, Power Point, and Word. Experience in the financial services industry preferred, specifically in Control/Compliance/Regulatory environment. ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type : ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,MORE ABOUT THIS JOB

ENGINEERING

What We Do

At Goldman Sachs, our Engineers don't just make things - we make things possible. Change the world by connecting people and capital with ideas. Solve the most challenging and pressing engineering problems for our clients. Join our engineering teams that build massively scalable software and systems, architect low latency infrastructure solutions, proactively guard against cyber threats, and leverage machine learning alongside financial engineering to continuously turn data into action. Create new businesses, transform finance, and explore a world of opportunity at the speed of markets.

Engineering, which is comprised of our Technology Division and global strategists groups, is at the critical center of our business, and our dynamic environment requires innovative strategic thinking and immediate, real solutions. Want to push the limit of digital possibilities? Start here.

Who We Look For

Goldman Sachs Engineers are innovators and problem-solvers, building solutions in risk management, big data, mobile and more. We look for creative collaborators who evolve, adapt to change and thrive in a fast-paced global environment.

Risk division develops comprehensive processes to monitor, assess, and manage the risk of expected and unexpected events that may have an adverse impact on the firm. Risk teams play a critical function for the firm, driving how the firm takes and manages risk. Risk Engineering platforms and data team offers common solutions for Risk. It is at the forefront of developing world class engineering solutions, including cloud computing and big data analytics, optimized storage management, self-service toolkits, building compelling visualizations using web components, discovering information in unstructured data sources, writing automation bots and many more. The team has strong appetite to embrace latest tech stack offered in the market place to promote efficiency and agile delivery. We need passionate software engineers with good programming skills ready to use Java, JavaScript, Python, React, Apache Spark and open source data science toolkits to build solutions that offer best in class experience to our risk managers and analysts.

RESPONSIBILITIES AND QUALIFICATIONS

HOW YOU WILL FULFILL YOUR POTENTIAL• Work in a dynamic, fast-paced environment that provides exposure to all areas of Risk• Build disruptive solutions using cutting edge technologies with measurable commercial outcomes• Understand business needs, facilitating and developing process workflow, data requirements, and specifications required to support implementation• Develop technical specifications, high level/detailed design, testing strategies, and implementation plans from business requirements• Manage end-to-end systems development cycle from requirements analysis, coding, testing, UAT and maintenance• Build strong relationships with business facing technology teams and business partners• Lead talented software engineers who are passionate about identifying patterns and building common solutionsSKILLS AND EXPERIENCE WE ARE LOOKING FOR• Bachelors degree in Computer Science, Mathematics, Electrical Engineering or related technical discipline• Experience in software development, including a clear understanding of data structures, algorithms, software design and core programming concepts• Comfortable multi-tasking, managing multiple stakeholders and working as part of a team• Excellent communication skills including experience speaking to technical and business audiences and working globally• Expertise in full stack front end Web Development or server side Java development with Relational Databases• Can apply an entrepreneurial approach and passion to problem solving and product development• Strong problem solving and analytical skills• Experience in team leadPreferred Qualifications• Strong programming experience in at least one language (preferably Javascript or Java)• Demonstrate front end design aesthetics with focus on User Experience.• Technologies: Web/RESTful service development: HTML 5, JavaScript/AngularJS/React/Redux, JSON• Technologies: TDD (JUnit), build tools (Maven/Gradle/Ant), Scala, Java, Spark, Tableau, Linux and shell scripting• Experience with continuous delivery and deployment• Proficient at working with large and complex code bases

ABOUT GOLDMAN SACHS

ABOUT GOLDMAN SACHS

At Goldman Sachs, we commit our people, capital and ideas to help our clients, shareholders and the communities we serve to grow. Founded in 1869, we are a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm. Headquartered in New York, we maintain offices around the world. We believe who you are makes you better at what you do. We're committed to fostering and advancing diversity and inclusion in our own workplace and beyond by ensuring every individual within our firm has a number of opportunities to grow professionally and personally, from our training and development opportunities and firmwide networks to benefits, wellness and personal finance offerings and mindfulness programs. Learn more about our culture, benefits, and people at GS.com/careers. We're committed to finding reasonable accommodations for candidates with special needs or disabilities during our recruiting process. Learn more: https://www.goldmansachs.com/careers/footer/disability-statement.html

© The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., 2020. All rights reserved.Goldman Sachs is an equal employment/affirmative action employer Female/Minority/Disability/Veteran/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity,The Data Analytics Senior Analyst is a seasoned professional role. Applies in-depth disciplinary knowledge, contributing to the development of new techniques and the improvement of processes and work-flow for the area or function. Integrates subject matter and industry expertise within a defined area. Requires in-depth understanding of how areas collectively integrate within the sub-function as well as coordinate and contribute to the objectives of the function and overall business. Evaluates moderately complex and variable issues with substantial potential impact, where development of an approach/taking of an action involves weighing various alternatives and balancing potentially conflicting situations using multiple sources of information. Requires good analytical skills in order to filter, prioritize and validate potentially complex and dynamic material from multiple sources. Strong communication and diplomacy skills are required. Regularly assumes informal/formal leadership role within teams. Involved in coaching and training of new recruits. Significant impact in terms of project size, geography, etc. by influencing decisions through advice, counsel and/or facilitating services to others in area of specialization. Work and performance of all teams in the area are directly affected by the performance of the individual. Responsibilities: Required Skills : 8+ years of overall experience in Information Technology and Systems 4+ years in Big data, Hadoop and Hadoop-ecosystems Must have experience troubleshooting applications/jobs running on big data platform Monitoring and controlling the performance and status of technology components, and providing technology component support and problem resolution Experienced in anticipating problems and taking decisive action to solve issues proactively Good understanding of RHEL OS concepts, process management and resource scheduling Good Understanding of Server Resources - networking, CPU, memory and storage Analyze multi-tenancy job execution issues and resolve Experienced in deployment and Administration for different Hadoop distribution for leading organizations, which deal with strong enterprise-scale solutions architecture and implementation. Experience with analytic or feature engineer programming (Python or Scala or Java). Experience with ETL framework (Talend, AbInitio) Experience with Confluent Kafka a plus Experience with Big Data Cloud Services on GCP and AWS a plus Excellent written and verbal communication skills Qualifications: 5-8 years experience using tools for statistical modeling of large data sets Ability to effectively use complex analytical, interpretive and problem solving techniques Demonstratedinterpersonal, verbal and written communication skills Education: Bachelors/University degree or equivalent experience This job description provides a high-level review of the types of work performed. Other job-related duties may be assigned as required. ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type :Full time ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,Qualifications:+ This role requires a wide variety of strengths and capabilities, including: BS/BA degree or equivalent experience+ Expertise in application, data and infrastructure architecture disciplines+ Ability to work collaboratively in teams and develop meaningful relationships to achieve common goals+ Candidate must poses strong System Design and Documentation skills which should help understand detailed technical, functional requirements, user experience along with data and process flows.Ideal candidate would have strong experience in the following areas:+ Strong Technical and Design thinking skills+ Able to validate technical, functional requirements & operational challenges+ Able to create use cases, user stories+ Experience securing data and data consistency and completeness measures+ Help product/development team with work breakdown and prioritization+ Facilitate workshops/interviews/sessions/questionnaire aimed at interacting with specialized audiences of the product being developed and understanding the complete requirements details+ Liaise with internal/external users to understand the exact business requirements+ Experience building data platform and data pipelines using distributed architecture and cloud solution offerings+ Able to assist with test cases, identifying testing scenarios & failure conditions+ Prepare user manuals, technical handouts and operational manuals for the deployed application/systems+ Train end users and system users and make them comfortable with the new system+ Mentor the team by providing expert advice, suggestions, clarifying doubts and solving technical/functional issues+ Assist in the deployment of the system in the UAT and Production environmentsJPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,The Info Sec Prof Lead Analyst is an intermediate level position responsible for driving efforts to prevent, monitor and respond to information/data breaches and cyber-attacks. The overall objective of this role is to ensure the execution of Information Security directives and activities in alignment with Citi's data security policy. Responsibilities: Design and implement a solution for performance measurements on effectiveness of controls and overall vulnerability assessment program Analyze trends on assets security health posture and report using visualization tools for program review with management and stakeholders Analyze and report aggregated data from multiple data sources Develop data visualization mock-ups for monitoring program data trends and communicate using analytical tools Develop reports for tracking program effectiveness and update power point deck for weekly , monthly and quarterly updates Develop, optimize and provide continuous support for reports and ad-hoc queries from end user Create dashboards with parameters and interactive drill down functionality Analyze trends on assets security health posture and report using visualization tools for program review with management and stakeholders Excellent Analytical Ability - Understand the systems and data flow at a high level to evaluate if appropriate controls are in place for the standards Provide timely, accurate, and actionable reporting on application vulnerability activity, trends, service levels, and areas of concern to senior management Streamline and automate report creation and distribution for weekly & monthly reporting Work with the Metrics reporting team to enhance and refine the metrics and key performance indicators reported to senior management and external regulatory agencies Develop User acceptance test plans for testing changes to system enhancements that impact governance and compliance Document business requirements related to system enhancements and submit for reviews and approvals Perform data analysis from multiple systems and assess completeness of data for reporting Ensure data integrity and compliance by performing data audits and data validation Performs root cause analysis on metric trends and provide insight to governance team for appropriate refinements to rules Qualifications: At least 7+ years of strong data analysis and report development experience 7+ years of experience in information security or related technology experience required At least 7+ years experience with Business Intelligence Reporting tools like Cognos, Tableau At least 7+ years experience with Databases like Oracle, SQL Server, Microsoft Access Strong Business Intelligence Developer Skills Strong understanding of application development life cycle, CI/CD and DevOps concepts Excellent Excel data analysis and Access database skills Excellent SQL Skills Experience with issue resolution - ability to research, identify and communicate solutions Excellent documentation skills - Collect, summarize and synthesize information in an auditable format Excellent organization and multi-tasking skills Proven influencing and relationship management skills Education: Bachelors degree in information security, computer science, computer information systems or a related information technology discipline ------------------------------------------------- Grade :All Job Level - All Job FunctionsAll Job Level - All Job Functions - US ------------------------------------------------------ Time Type : ------------------------------------------------------ Citi is an equal opportunity and affirmative action employer. Minority/Female/Veteran/Individuals with Disabilities/Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Citigroup Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Citi) invite all qualified interested applicants to apply for career opportunities. If you are a person with a disability and need a reasonable accommodation to use our search tools and/or apply for a career opportunity CLICK HERE . To view the "EEO is the Law" poster CLICK HERE . To view the EEO is the Law Supplement CLICK HERE . To view the EEO Policy Statement CLICK HERE . To view the Pay Transparency Posting CLICK HERE .,Expertise in Healthcare data analytics

Expertise in designing and implementing healthcare metrics

Expertise in data mining in support of metrics development and to identify trends

Expertise in linking EDI data to analytics products

Knowledge in understanding and implementing metrics and analysis to identify fraud, waste, and abuse within a healthcare entity

Expertize in creating data analytics reports specially within the EDI Healthcare industry

Expertise in data analytics and reporting tools specially SAS (including SAS Visual Analytics), Microsoft Business Intelligence tools, SSRS, SSIS, Excel pivot tables

Previous Applicants

If you have previously applied to a position on our website, input your e-mail address and password below to login. Then simply click "Add to My Jobs" to apply for additional positions. There is no need to complete an employment application more than once.

Previous Applicants: Email: Password:

If you do not remember your password click here.

Back to Search Results

New Search

.

Kforce Government Solutions, Inc. (KGS) is a provider of financial, transformation, and technology solutions to the federal government. For more than 40 years, KGS has partnered with defense and federal civilian agencies to help solve complex mission and business challenges.

ABOUT US

Leadership

Expertise

Customers

Contracts

SOLUTIONS

Financial Management

Transformation Management

Technology

PRODUCTS

TraumaFX®

NightWatch

RESOURCES

Contact Us

Careers

Newsroom

LEGAL

Terms of Use

Privacy Policy

KGS Affirmative Action Statement

Federal Workplace Posting,The Business Intelligence and Data Analyst performs complex (journey-level) data analysis, solutions development, and reporting work for Strategic Initiatives. Works with internal and external teams to understand, interpret, and analyze various business operations, including the development and implementation of solutions that support continuous improvement and strategic planning across the agency. Works under general supervision, with moderate latitude for the use of initiative and independent judgment. State Classification 0653Data Analyst IVB24 WHAT YOU WILL DOBusiness Intelligence and Data Analysis bull Defines, captures, enriches, explores and preps data to support desired metrics monitoring and reports. bull Applies a broad range of techniques and theories from business intelligence, data analysis and visualization, statistics, predictive analytics and machine learning to deliver actionable business insights based on large-scale data.bull Defines, develops, and implements automation of reports, processes, and interfaces.bull Interprets and translates business operation needs into effective applications and operational requirements to assist staff with implementation of continuous improvement solutions.bull Develops queries to extract data to support decision-making.bull Facilitates the interpretation of data from various sources to improve strategic decision-making.bull Troubleshoots and resolves problems related to business operations systems and applications.bull Analyzes data to identify trends, anomalies, and areas of action.bull Researches, recommends, and implements methodologies for reporting data and statistics, including key performance indicators.bull Performs quality assurance and serves as a subject matter expert on data integrity, extraction, testing and compilation.bull Leverages mature data with variablealgorithm selection, predictive and behavioral analytics to identify emerging risks and issues beyond operational controls. bull Understands and compiles accurate data and assesses data quality.bull Identifies data gaps, errors, anomalies, inconsistencies, and redundancies by analyzing the content, structure, and relationships within data.bull Communicates with internal customers to address questions related to data integrity, modifications, and trends.bull Provides thorough and transparent data reports and analysis. bull Tracks trends and provides recommendations for solutions based on findings.bull Designs and develops models to project impacts of improvement recommendations. Development and Management of Reporting Tools bull Assists with evaluating business unit needs related to reporting tools.bull Identifies and compiles data needed for the development of dashboards.bull Designs and develops dashboards that provide visibility into key performance and risk indicators across the agency.bull Reviews and analyzes routine reports and updates reporting tools as necessary.bull Creates continuous improvement deliverables, including analyses, dashboards, reports and presentations. bull Assists in the development andor validation of performance measure standards for internal customers. bull Interprets and communicates analytical insights to audiences with various analytical backgrounds using different but suitable communication methods for different audiences. Research and Reportsbull Assists in developing research and program evaluation models and methods, particularly those that impact process changes and improvements.bull Works with internal customers and vendors to carry out research.bull Identifies data needed for reports and presentations.bull Serves as a resource for reports interpretation and assists with developing specifications for reports.bull Assists with the development of process flow maps and diagrams. bull Monitors and reviews current organizational, procedural, and operational systems for effectiveness, efficiency, and conformance to established guidelines.bull Researches and analyzes agency policies, procedures and practices to identify and generate insight for best practices and process improvements.bull Assists with the preparation of professional papers or reports.bull Researches pension industry trends and best practices to help identify next big issues for improvement.Performs related work as assigned WHAT YOU WILL BRING Minimum Required QualificationsEducationbull Bachelorrsquos degree from an accredited four-year college or university in Information Technology, Data Analytics, Business Intelligence or a related field. Experiencebull Three (3) years of full-time experience in data analytics, business intelligence or similar field. bull Experience with MS Power BI, SQL, MS SQL Server, business intelligence and visualization tools, and MS Office Suite.bull Experience may be concurrent. Preferred Qualifications bull Experience with MS Visual Studio, MS Visio, Jira, IBM Blueworks Live and Talend Data Fabric.bull Experience working with a star-schema data warehouse or other data analytic data structures.bull Lean, Six Sigma, Theory of Constraints, or Government Quality and Improvement methodology.bull Strategic Planning experience.,Q2 is seeking a  Data Migration Analystthat will join an existing data migration team that’s responsible for converting the client’s online banking data from their legacy system onto the Q2 platform. This is a technical implementation role that requires mid-sized application experience. The Data Migration Analyst will work closely with the Platform and Project Services Implementation teams to migrate our client’s data from their legacy online banking provider to Q2’s required data format. The preferred candidate will be an exceptionally detail-oriented, energetic, self-starter who can work independently and in a team setting. We are seeking an analytically minded individual passionate about data and one with a keen eye for detail! This role is working in one of the most visible departments at Q2 and you will have the opportunity for a lot of career growth and development.

RESPONSIBILITIES:

Construct Python frameworks to convert online banking data from flat files to relational databases based on specifications provided by business analysts.
Troubleshoot and resolve client’s data migration issues of a complex nature.
Thoroughly document and track production environment modifications.
Escalate unresolved problems to the appropriate resources.
Establish relationships with other partner teams that impact technical support including Implementation Teams, Data Center Operations, QA, and Development.
Follow internal change control processes to implement any required production modifications.
Contribute to a knowledge/FAQ database for supported software.
Perform other duties and responsibilities as assigned.


EXPERIENCE AND KNOWLEDGE:

1 – 3 years of previous experience
Experience with Python and SQL scripting
Excellent communication, analytical, and problem-solving skills required
Keen attention to detail while keeping an eye toward the big picture
Availability to work occasional weekends or late night / early morning is required
Enterprise/mid-sized software delivery experience preferred
Understanding of remote tools and networking required
Ability to deal with ambiguity, tight timelines and demanding constraints
Ability to work on multiple assignments, prioritize, and resolve issues in a timely manner within a high-pressure environment
Innate desire to find the root cause of technical issues, while balancing business needs to identify, support, and solve customer needs
Knowledge of banking practices is helpful,Job Description:

Job Title:
USGAAP Financial and Reference Data Control Analyst

Corporate Title:
Analyst

Location:
Jacksonville, FL

Overview

The USGAAP Financial and Reference Data Control Analyst role coordinates and assists with recurring outputs and reports. You will assist the Financial Reporting Analysts, Specialists, and Leads in the timely delivery of reports, and edit as requested by managers in the group. The Financial, Regulatory and Risk Reporting Support Analyst organizes checks on reports and ensures consistency across all reporting in accordance with relevant accounting standards. You may partner with various stakeholders in the Bank to collect the necessary information for reporting. This role is needed to support financial and regulatory reporting from USGAAP standpoint.

What We Offer You:
We offer competitive health and wellness benefits, empowering you to value life in and out of the office
On-site gym, cafeteria, health center, and communal meeting areas
Active engagement with the local community through Deutsche Banks specialized employee groups
An open seating environment that encourages networking and collaboration across functions and businesses
Hear from our people and look inside our office: DB@The Muse

Your Key Responsibilities:
Prepare and maintain the Banks USGAAP consolidation tool (Regional Consolidation System - RCS) for financial regulatory as well as internal reporting requirements. This involves remediating data quality issues, system enhancements, testing scenario analysis capabilities and establishing sound control framework around USGAAP consolidation processes
Coordinate efforts between various relevant stakeholders such as Legal Vehicle Controllers, Quality Assurance Coordinators, Global Technology, Finance Directors, etc. to resolve consolidation breaks/issues
Maintain oversight of USGAAP related chart of account and facilitate changes by performing impact analysis on various reporting parameters. Engage appropriate stakeholders from reporting standpoint to review and approve relevant changes
Oversee and maintain various referential data touch points in multiple reporting systems to ensure timely and accurate reporting, and drive process improvements and track projects to streamline complex tasks performed by the team
Perform deep dive analysis to identify and eliminate redundancies in existing processes to create capacity which can be utilized elsewhere
Create and/or maintain Key Operating Procedures for all functions performed by the USGAAP local control team
Your Skills and Experience:
Bachelors Degree and relevant accounting and/or finance industry experience or internship experience
You will be expected to be able to work independently with multiple deadlines and have the ability to focus and prioritize in a high pressure environment
Strong analytical skills, detail-oriented, service commitment, and solid organizational and interpersonal skills
Ability to manage and deliver on senior management expectations
Excellent PC skills to include experience with MS Word, Excel, and PowerPoint
Our values define the working environment we strive to create - diverse, supportive and welcoming of different views. We embrace a culture reflecting a variety of perspectives, insights and backgrounds to drive innovation. We build talented and diverse teams to drive business results and encourage our people to develop to their full potential. Talk to us about flexible work arrangements and other initiatives we offer.

We promote good working relationships and encourage high standards of conduct and work performance. We welcome applications from talented people from all cultures, countries, races, genders, sexual orientations, disabilities, beliefs and generations and are committed to providing a working environment free from harassment, discrimination and retaliation.

Click here to find out more about our diversity and inclusion policy and initiatives.

We are an Equal Opportunity Employer - Veterans/Disabled and other protected categories. Click these links to view the following notices: EEO is the Law poster and supplement; Employee Rights and Responsibilities under the Family and Medical Leave Act; Employee Polygraph Protection Act and Pay Transparency Nondiscrimination Provision.,Job Description:DB USA Core Corporation seeks an Assistant Vice President, Anti Financial Crime Data Quality Analyst in Jacksonville, FL to support the AFC T&R Data team with the AFC Americas Data Governance implementation by assisting in the management of project dashboards, project plans, and communication to stakeholders of project status. Requires a: Bachelor's degree in Business Administration, Finance, or related field, or equivalent and two (2) years of experience coordinating complex initiatives in the Financial Services industry within the area of AFC Compliance in Corporate Investment Banking. Prior experience must include two (2) years of experience assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of systems within Global Transaction Banking; developing, implementing, maintaining and enhancing the anti-money laundering policies, procedures, systems and controls to ensure comprehensive customer identification, customer due diligence, and suspicious activity monitoring and reporting; identifying, analyzing, and evaluating Quality Issues of Anti-Money Laundering systems; establishing KPIs Metrics and compiling management information reports to conduct data driven analysis and make recommendations; identifying insufficiencies of AFC Compliance controls in place, defining proper solutions and deliverables, and recommending changes and transparency to the complexity of internal controls; in executing duties, utilizing Anti-Money Laundering systems and Data and Compliance Intelligence Tools including Sharepoint, Tableau, Skype for Business, and functions including Pivot Tables, Macro, Vlookup, Count If, and Match. #DNIOur values define the working environment we strive to create - diverse, supportive and welcoming of different views. We embrace a culture reflecting a variety of perspectives, insights and backgrounds to drive innovation. We build talented and diverse teams to drive business results and encourage our people to develop to their full potential. Talk to us about flexible work arrangements and other initiatives we offer.We promote good working relationships and encourage high standards of conduct and work performance. We welcome applications from talented people from all cultures, countries, races, genders, sexual orientations, disabilities, beliefs and generations and are committed to providing a working environment free from harassment, discrimination and retaliation.Click here to find out more about our diversity and inclusion policy and initiatives.We are an Equal Opportunity Employer - Veterans/Disabled and other protected categories. Click these links to view the following notices: EEO is the Law poster and supplement; Employee Rights and Responsibilities under the Family and Medical Leave Act; Employee Polygraph Protection Act and Pay Transparency Nondiscrimination Provision.,Job Description

Job Description:

DB USA Core Corporation seeks an Assistant Vice President, Anti Financial Crime Data Quality Analyst in Jacksonville, FL to support the AFC T & R Data team with the AFC Americas Data Governance implementation by assisting in the management of project dashboards, project plans, and communication to stakeholders of project status. Requires a: Bachelor's degree in Business Administration, Finance, or related field, or equivalent and two (2) years of experience coordinating complex initiatives in the Financial Services industry within the area of AFC Compliance in Corporate Investment Banking. Prior experience must include two (2) years of experience assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of systems within Global Transaction Banking; developing, implementing, maintaining and enhancing the anti-money laundering policies, procedures, systems and controls to ensure comprehensive customer identification, customer due diligence, and suspicious activity monitoring and reporting; identifying, analyzing, and evaluating Quality Issues of Anti-Money Laundering systems; establishing KPIs Metrics and compiling management information reports to conduct data driven analysis and make recommendations; identifying insufficiencies of AFC Compliance controls in place, defining proper solutions and deliverables, and recommending changes and transparency to the complexity of internal controls; in executing duties, utilizing Anti-Money Laundering systems and Data and Compliance Intelligence Tools including Sharepoint, Tableau, Skype for Business, and functions including Pivot Tables, Macro, Vlookup, Count If, and Match. #DNI

Our values define the working environment we strive to create - diverse, supportive and welcoming of different views. We embrace a culture reflecting a variety of perspectives, insights and backgrounds to drive innovation. We build talented and diverse teams to drive business results and encourage our people to develop to their full potential. Talk to us about flexible work arrangements and other initiatives we offer.

We promote good working relationships and encourage high standards of conduct and work performance. We welcome applications from talented people from all cultures, countries, races, genders, sexual orientations, disabilities, beliefs and generations and are committed to providing a working environment free from harassment, discrimination and retaliation.

Click to find out more about our diversity and inclusion policy and initiatives.

We are an Equal Opportunity Employer - Veterans/Disabled and other protected categories. Click these links to view the following notices: EEO is the Law poster and supplement; Employee Rights and Responsibilities under the Family and Medical Leave Act; Employee Polygraph Protection Act and Pay Transparency Nondiscrimination Provision.
Deutsche Bank is an Equal Opportunity Employer - Veterans/Disabled and other protected categories.,Senior Data Analyst- Guidewire Data Hub
Jacksonville, Florida- Contract to Hire

ARC Group has an immediate need for an experienced Sr. Data Analyst to join our client's Guidewire Support group. This position will initially be remote but will be eventually working from our client's Jacksonville, FL office.

Our client has an excellent reputation and looking to bring on a Senior Data Analyst for a Contract to Hire Opportunity. Please do not apply if you are a C2C recruiter or someone needing sponsorship.

Overview:
You will be responsible for understanding business needs, assessing the impact of the change, and translating into technical specifications. Work with the technical project team to ensure those technical requirements are documented, understood, and implemented all while supporting and communicating with the business through the implementation process.
You will be responsible for identifying business needs, assessing the impact of the change, working with the business to align the need to the base application functionality, documenting the requirements, and walking the business through the documentation to obtain approval.
Responsible for project development testing and data governance/management. This includes the development of integrated test plans and test cases, execution of the tests, analysis, and documentation of the results.
The analyst is involved throughout the entire development lifecycle (e.g., initial concept, requirement gathering, development support, testing, and final implementation and post-production support).
Position Qualifications:
Expert in data mapping, modeling, lineage, governance, and management
At least 7+ years of Guidewire Insurance Suite knowledge (Policy Center, Claim Center, Billing Center)
At least 3+ years as a Data Analyst maintaining the Data Specifications document for the Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center product at a large corporation
Effective, clear and concise verbal and written communication skills
Business Intelligence experience (Business Objects, Cognos or other BI tool)
Working knowledge of SQL (TSQL/PL SQL)
Working knowledge of ETL
5+ of QA testing experience
Working knowledge of DW/EDW, Data Hubs/Data Lakes
Education equivalent to a college degree in information technology or technical-related discipline, or the equivalent in related work experience
7+ years of Data Analyst experience.
7+ years of Guidewire Property & Casualty Guidewire Insurance industry
3+ Years Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center experience
Occasional travel is required
Preferred:
Cognos experience
10+ years of Data Analyst experience.
At least 9+ years of Guidewire Insurance Suite knowledge (Policy Center, Claim Center, Billing Center)
At least 5+ years as a Data Analyst maintaining the Data Specifications document for the Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center product at a large corporation
Advanced QA Testing experience is a plus.
Expert in SQL (T-SQL/PL SQL)
Expert in ETL
Expert in DW/EDW, Data Hubs/Data Lakes
Agile Project experience
Would you like to know more about our Senior Data Analyst role?

Great, we would like to hear from you. Please reach out to our dedicated recruiter for this role in Siana Johnson by applying below OR emailing her directly at sjohnson@arcgonline.com. If you would like to see our other positions, please visit our job board at www.arcgonline.com,As a member of our Software Engineering Group, we look first and foremost for people who are passionate around solving business problems through innovation and engineering practices. You'll be required to apply your depth of knowledge and expertise to all aspects of the software development lifecycle, as well as partner continuously with your many stakeholders on a daily basis to stay focused on common goals. We embrace a culture of experimentation and constantly strive for improvement and learning. You'll work in a collaborative, trusting, thought-provoking environment-one that encourages diversity of thought and creative solutions that are in the best interests of our customers globally.This role requires a wide variety of strengths and capabilities, including:+ BS/BA degree or equivalent experience+ Advanced knowledge of application, data, and infrastructure architecture disciplines+ Understanding of architecture and design across all systems+ Working proficiency in developmental toolsets+ Knowledge of industry-wide technology trends and best practices+ Ability to work in large, collaborative teams to achieve organizational goals+ Passionate about building an innovative culture+ Proficiency in one or more modern programming languages+ Understanding of software skills such as business analysis, development, maintenance, and software improvement+ Experience with; Scala/ Sqoop / Spark / Unix / Hadoop /large data setsJPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,As a member of our Software Engineering Group, we look first and foremost for people who are passionate around solving business problems through innovation and engineering practices. You'll be required to apply your depth of knowledge and expertise to all aspects of the software development lifecycle, as well as partner continuously with your many stakeholders on a daily basis to stay focused on common goals. We embrace a culture of experimentation and constantly strive for improvement and learning. You'll work in a collaborative, trusting, thought-provoking environment-one that encourages diversity of thought and creative solutions that are in the best interests of our customers globally.

This role requires a wide variety of strengths and capabilities, including:
BS/BA degree or equivalent experience
Advanced knowledge of application, data, and infrastructure architecture disciplines
Understanding of architecture and design across all systems
Working proficiency in developmental toolsets
Knowledge of industry-wide technology trends and best practices
Ability to work in large, collaborative teams to achieve organizational goals
Passionate about building an innovative culture
Proficiency in one or more modern programming languages
Understanding of software skills such as business analysis, development, maintenance, and software improvement
Expertise with: Java / Hive/ Kafka / API's / Spring Boot / Cloud Foundary / Avro
JPMorgan Chase & Co., one of the oldest financial institutions, offers innovative financial solutions to millions of consumers, small businesses and many of the world's most prominent corporate, institutional and government clients under the J.P. Morgan and Chase brands. Our history spans over 200 years and today we are a leader in investment banking, consumer and small business banking, commercial banking, financial transaction processing and asset management.

We recognize that our people are our strength and the diverse talents they bring to our global workforce are directly linked to our success. We are an equal opportunity employer and place a high value on diversity and inclusion at our company. We do not discriminate on the basis of any protected attribute, including race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital or veteran status, pregnancy or disability, or any other basis protected under applicable law. In accordance with applicable law, we make reasonable accommodations for applicants' and employees' religious practices and beliefs, as well as any mental health or physical disability needs.

Equal Opportunity Employer/Disability/Veterans,In Vanguard's Client Experience & Digital (CXD) department, our goal is to evolve and enhance our clients’ digital experiences. As an analyst, you will wrangle data and perform descriptive analyses, design and measure experiments with statistical rigor, and visualize data to deliver actionable insights. As the analytics expert working in a cross-functional team, you will use data to inform strategy, uncover areas of opportunity, and apply statistics to enhance the client experience.

Core Responsibilities
Engages with internal partners to understand business strategy, questions and goals. Brings structure to business requests, translates requirements into an analytical project approach, and leads projects through completion. Delegates tasks and provides tactical and strategic guidance to peers.
Acquires and compiles structured and unstructured data and verifies its quality, accuracy and reasonableness.
Designs experiments, develops measurement plans, and tests hypotheses.
Performs analyses of historical data to surface trends and insights using advanced analytical methods.
Prepares and delivers visualizations and internal presentations that translate analytic insights into tangible, actionable solutions for business partners to implement.
Develops, owns, and manages recurring analytic or reporting processes.
Mentors, coaches, trains, and develops junior analysts. Proactively expands knowledge of business and analytics and shares with team members. Develops and documents best practices.
Participates in special projects and performs other duties as assigned.
Qualifications
Undergraduate degree (BA/BS) in an analytic/quantitative field. Master’s degree preferred.
A minimum of 3+ years of relevant professional experience in a data analysis role.
Experience querying data with SQL and programming with Python, R, or SAS.
Experience leading, designing and implementing marketing or digital experimentation (A/B or MVT) to improve marketing performance or improve the client experience.
About Vanguard

We are Vanguard. Together, we’re changing the way the world invests.

For us, investing doesn’t just end in value. It starts with values. Because when you invest with courage, when you invest with clarity, and when you invest with care, you can get so much more in return. We invest with purpose – and that’s how we’ve become a global market leader. Here, we grow by doing the right thing for the people we serve. And so can you.

We want to make success accessible to everyone. This is our opportunity. Let’s make it count.

Inclusion Statement

Vanguard’s continued commitment to diversity and inclusion is firmly rooted in our culture. Every decision we make to best serve our clients, crew (internally employees are referred to as crew), and communities is guided by one simple statement: “Do the right thing.”

We believe that a critical aspect of doing the right thing requires building diverse, inclusive, and highly effective teams of individuals who are as unique as the clients they serve. We empower our crew to contribute their distinct strengths to achieving Vanguard’s core purpose through our values.

When all crew members feel valued and included, our ability to collaborate and innovate is amplified, and we are united in delivering on Vanguard's core purpose.

Our core purpose: To take a stand for all investors, to treat them fairly, and to give them the best chance for investment success.,Specific information related to the position is outlined below. To apply, click on the button above. You will be required to create an account (or sign in with an existing account). Your account will provide you access to your application information. Need Help?
Should you have a disability and need assistance with the application process, please request a reasonable accommodation by emailing Accessibility or by calling 877-891-2510. This email inbox is monitored for reasonable accommodation requests only. Any other correspondence will not receive a response.


Regular or Temporary:

Regular

Language Fluency: English (Required)

Work Shift:

1st shift (United States of America)
Please review the following job description:
Gather, analyze, document and maintain all data requirements related to the business applications, interfaces and reporting environments. Apply standards and best practices to ensure the Bank’s data is accurate, complete, current, understandable and accessible. Work closely with internal clients, business analysts and development project teams to resolve information flow and content issues. Develop or modify procedures to solve complex business problems considering client needs, process analysis, design, simulation, application capabilities and industry requirements. Demonstrate knowledge and skill in data warehousing and transactional application data concepts and technology. Provide leadership in defining data policy and standards. Partner with lines of business (LOBs) to understand business needs, and align the data architecture and governance direction to meet those needs. Champion the use of technology to drive efficient, effective data management processes. Lead work on all phases of systems analysis up to the enterprise level of the Bank's business processes and systems.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
Following is a summary of the essential functions for this job. Other duties may be performed, both major and minor, which are not mentioned below. Specific activities may change from time to time.
Gather, review, analyze, profile, validate and map system data into the data warehouse to meet reporting and analytical business needs.
Perform complex data analysis and troubleshooting on data-related issues reported by production support and other teams.
Analyze business requirements and develop effective technology solutions consisting of extract, transform and load (ETL).
Develop solutions and recommendations for improving data integrity issues. Analyze data issues and work with development teams for problem resolutions. Identify problematic areas and conduct research to determine the best course of action to correct the data, identify, analyze and interpret trends and patterns in complex datasets.
Determine and analyze line of business requirements, use system data, and provide input needed by various departments and senior management to produce business reports.
Work with ETL developers to test and validate data attributes and with other business analysts to ensure data is integrated consistently, regardless of the source system.
Possess the highest level understanding of the Bank's business systems and industry requirements. Assist in the business process redesign and documentation as needed for new technology.
Translate high level business requirements into functional specifications for the IT organization and manage changes to such specifications.
Work with source system business analysts to understand system nuances and resolve data issues.
Take ownership of issues through resolution, including close coordination between business analysts.
Create and maintain clean, clear and accurate data.
Create and maintain of data analyst competency and best practices.
Understand data governance principles and how they apply.
Create of data quality metrics and scorecards.
Work on ad-hoc data requests.
Perform regular audits of data.
Instruct, direct and mentor other members of the team.

Required Skills and Competencies:
The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill and/or ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
Bachelor’s degree in Information Technology, Information Systems, Computer Science or business-related field, or equivalent education and related training
Ten years in a role of data analysis, statistical analysis, data transformation, data reconciliation and/or sophisticated data presentation
Experience in ETL development using standard tools
Strong issue and problem management, including root cause analysis and troubleshooting skills
Ability to perform analysis with little to no direction, proactively identifying potential issues in the data and conducting research to determine the best course of action to correct the data
Understanding of Enterprise Data Warehouse concepts and prior experience applying that understanding to query data in a Very Large Database (VLDB) environment
Familiarity in using data analysis tools
Strong technical documentation skills
Ability to work with multiple areas within the Bank to determine business objectives and data requirements
Ability to identify problematic areas and conduct research to determine the best course of action to correct the data
Strong technical leadership skills
Ability to interpret data that is not well defined or documented and develop recommendations based on findings
Strong analytical, organizational and problem-solving skills as well as strong interpersonal skills with the ability to work with management, peers and Enterprise Data Office (EDO) staff
Strong presentation and communication skills, both written and verbal
Ability to lead and direct team members in completion of complex projects
Demonstrated proficiency in basic computer applications, such as Microsoft Office software products
Ability to travel, occasionally overnight

Desired Skills:
Understanding of business intelligence and business intelligence software packages
Experience with Informatica
Background in banking and general banking systems
Working knowledge of Statistical Analysis System (SAS) and other analytic tools
Ability to recommend the growth, addition and retirement of data analytics toolsets

Truist supports a diverse workforce and is an Equal Opportunity Employer who does not discriminate against individuals on the basis of race, gender, color, religion, national origin, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, veteran status or other classification protected by law. Drug Free Workplace.

Thank you for your interest in Truist! BB&T and SunTrust have come together in a transformational merger of equals to create Truist, the premier financial organization in the country. You may notice references to our legacy company names, BB&T and SunTrust, in places throughout this site. All such references should be understood to refer to Truist moving forward while we continue to transition to the Truist name.

EEO is the Law Pay Transparency Nondiscrimination Provision E-Verify,Sr. Marketing Data Analyst

WHO WE ARE:

Freedom Financial Network is a family of companies that takes a people-first approach to financial services, using technology to empower consumers to overcome debt and create a brighter financial future. The company was founded in 2002 by Brad Stroh and Andrew Housser on the belief that by staying committed to helping people, you can ensure better financial outcomes for both the customer and the business. This Heart + $ philosophy still guides the vision of our growing company, which has helped millions of people find solutions for their financial needs.

What began with 2 people in a spare bedroom has now rapidly expanded to a vibrant business that employs over 2500 employees (known internally as The Freedom Family) in two locations: San Mateo, CA and Tempe, AZ. When you visit either of our offices, you’ll understand why our employees have voted us the Best Place to Work for the last several years. It’s a place where the Heart + $ philosophy continues to thrive, where we believe that success is only achieved by doing what’s right for our customers, our employees, and our communities.

In order to create brighter futures for our clients, employees, and businesses, Freedom Financial Network holds itself to four core values that have grown out of our Heart + $ philosophy: to care for everyone around us, act with integrity every time, collaborate with everybody we work with, and get better at what we do every day.

THE OPPORTUNITY:

We are looking for a Sr. Data Analyst who will work closely with our internal and external business partners in managing analytic-related process and execution for marketing. In this role, you will be involved in analyzing campaign results, validating assumptions and provide recommendation for future campaigns and product offerings. You will also collaborate with team members in assessing and developing new analytic opportunities within the broader realm of Marketing Analytics.

THE ROLE:
Closely work with marketing business partners to understand direct mail marketing initiatives and ensure successful end-to-end execution of ongoing direct mail production
Perform data operations
Implement and execute scoring models
Perform data / model validation to ensure rigorous quality control and detect any potential issues in data
Response and loan funding forecasting
Support senior data scientists to analyze, tracking historical marketing results and be able to apply the knowledge to making future decisions on forecasting, target population selection decisions
Ad-Hoc analysis to answer business questions and generate insights on direct mail marketing results.
Interact with multiple function teams across the marketing organization to implement solutions and improve processes
Identify areas of opportunities in marketing for improvement and automation
REQUIREMENTS/CHARACTERISTICS:
Experience in SQL, Python, R, Excel, and Tableau
Experience in data analytics and basic statistical modeling concepts such as multivariate regression, segmentation modeling, machine learning, data mining, simulation, optimization, forecasting.
An effective cross functional communicator in both written and verbal skills
Ability and willingness to learn in a fast-paced environment and adapt to the situation
6+ years of working experience in qualitative analysis is required, ideally supporting a Marketing department
Bachelor’s degree with Mathematical or engineering background: Statistics, Data Mining, Operations Research, Econometrics, Finance, Engineering or similar
We will sponsor VISA for the right individual, we also employ citizens, green card holders, and OPT/CPT status applicants.
CULTURAL FIT (Our Core Values):

Care (for everyone): We show compassion and contribute to the well-being and growth of those around us. We only pursue products that improve the financial lives of our clients.
Act with Integrity (every time): We take the right action even when it is hard and even when no one is watching. We treat our employees, clients, and communities the way they wish to be treated.
Get Better (every day): We innovate, iterate, and improve each day. We are creative, take thoughtful risks, and ultimately learn and recover from failures.
COLLABORATE (with everybody): We strive to work together toward a common purpose by proactively sharing information and inviting participation. We recognize the perspective of various groups and embrace healthy, constructive debate.
WHY JOIN THE FREEDOM FAMILY?
Fast, continued growth – there’s a lot of opportunity for advancement
Voted a Best Place to Work multiple times by our employees, most recently #1 in Phoenix for the 2ndyear in a row!
Benefits start within 30 days
401k with employer match
3 weeks’ paid vacation (increased with tenure)
9 paid holidays & 5 sick days
Paid time off for volunteer work and on your birthday
This is your opportunity to be part of a growing company where dedicated professionals strive to help customers and each other succeed every day. If that sounds exciting, we want to talk to you. Apply today!

Attention Agencies & Search Firms: We do not accept unsolicited candidate resumes or profiles. Please do not reach out to anyone within Freedom Financial Network (FFN) to market your services or candidates. All inquiries should be directed to Talent Acquisition only. We reserve the right to hire any candidates sent unsolicited and will not pay any fees without a contract signed by FFN’s Talent Acquisition leader.,Voleon is a technology company that applies state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to real-world problems in finance. For more than a decade, we have led our industry and worked at the frontier of applying machine learning to investment management. We have become a multibillion dollar asset manager, and we have ambitious goals for the future.

Your colleagues will include internationally recognized experts in machine learning research as well as highly experienced technology and finance professionals. The people who shape our company come from other backgrounds, too, including concert music performance, humanitarian aid, opera singing, sports writing, and BMX racing. You will be part of a team that loves to succeed together.

In addition to our enriching and collegial working environment, we offer competitive compensation and benefits packages, technology talks by our experts, a modern office, daily catered lunches, and more.

As a Data Analyst, you will be part of a team responsible for owning and simplifying the flow of data used by production trading algorithms at Voleon. Your work will focus on curating datasets and building processes and tools to standardize and simplify this curation. This role is a means to make a difference: as a machine learning company, data is essential to our business.
Responsibilities
Perform manual steps and develop automated processes to ensure the completeness and integrity of massive amounts of mission critical financial data pertaining to stocks, bonds, futures, commodities, and more
Partner with Members of Research Staff to curate new and existing datasets
Help drive continuous improvements to data quality procedures and a consistent approach to how data quality is measured, monitored and reported
Design systematic and automated processes and tools that allow the team to scale and rapidly onboard new datasets
Work global market hours from our Berkeley office for a portion of every year on a rotational basis
Requirements
Coursework or other relevant training in data analytics, programming, or computing systems
Proven problem-solving and analytical abilities including pattern detection, root cause analysis, and issue resolution
An interest in programming and data analysis / data science
Bachelor’s degree with a strong academic record
Authorization to work in the United States
Preferred Qualifications
Relevant experience in data operations, with proven process improvement skills
An understanding of the software development process and exposure to hands-on coding in a professional environment
Experience in exploratory data analysis and applied statistics
Experience with Python
Experience with SQL and working with a relational database system
Experience with Linux
While financial industry experience is a plus, we are open-minded in our search for critical thinkers who are passionate about technology and data
“Friends of Voleon” Candidate Referral Program
If you have a great candidate in mind for this role and would like to have the potential to earn $7,500 if your referred candidate is successfully hired and employed by The Voleon Group, please use this form to submit your referral. For more details regarding eligibility, terms and conditions please make sure to review the Voleon Referral Bonus Program.
Equal Opportunity Employer
The Voleon Group is an Equal Opportunity employer. Applicants are considered without regard to race, color, religion, creed, national origin, age, sex, gender, marital status, sexual orientation and identity, genetic information, veteran status, citizenship, or any other factors prohibited by local, state, or federal law.,At Franklin Templeton, we are dedicated to delivering strong results and exceptional service to clients, team members and business partners. Over 9,000 employees working in 60 offices around the world are dedicated to servicing investment solutions for our clients in more than 150 countries. For over 65 years, our success has been a direct result of the talent, skills and persistence of our people, and we are looking for qualified candidates to join our team.

We’re currently looking for a Senior Financial Systems Analyst / Business Intelligence Data Modeler to join our Financial Business Process and Systems (FinBPS) team.

FinBPS team members are experts in Business Process Analysis, Financial Systems Solutions, and Project Management. We evaluate and implement solutions for Systems, Processes, Controls and leverage best practices and innovation. Our clients include Shareholders and Company Leaders, and our Business Process Partners include Franklin Templeton Technology (IT department), Finance, and HR. Our mission is to provide optimal solutions that instill trust and confidence in the financial results for Franklin Templeton Investments.

What are the ongoing responsibilities of a Senior Financial Systems Analyst?
System administration
Perform and review tasks such as data loading, updating allocation rules and reports.
Provide support for internal customers in case of application, processes and data questions.
Coordinate with IT team for resolution of application and infrastructure issues.
Track and resolve users support issues with systems, applications and requests.
System enhancements and implementations
Develop changes/enhancements for system processes and models.
Track and resolve enhancement and implementation issues with users and project team.
Communicate with users, Systems Administration, IT Team, contractors, vendors and providers for upgrades, enhancements, fixes and troubleshooting.
Perform other duties as requested by project managers and managers
Maintain good working relationships with project team members, internal customers (e.g. Corporate Finance), and external service vendors.
Provide end-user systems training as needed.
Participate in internal customer meetings to better understand users’ requirements and challenges.
Provide support to other Finance groups to help understand processes and analyze data.
What ideal qualifications, skills & experience would help someone to be successful?
Bachelors or Advanced Degree in Finance, Accounting or Management Information Systems.
Experience in accounting, financial analysis or information technology is a plus.
Willing to learn new financial systems.
Hands-on experience with any ERP system, such as SAP, Oracle, or PeopleSoft.
Experience with Business Intelligence Tools such as Cognos Business Intelligence, Business Objects or Oracle Business Intelligence (OBIEE) is preferred.
Good skills in the area of Microsoft Office Package (Excel, Word).
Basic database and SQL knowledge will be considered as an advantage.
Previous experience working in the Financial Services Industry is a plus.
Very good communication skills and a good command of the English language.
Ability to work independently and take initiative to improve business processes/information flow in the organization.
What makes Franklin Templeton unique?
In addition to the dynamic and professional environment at Franklin Templeton, we strive to ensure that our employees have access to a competitive and valuable set of Total Rewards—the mix of both monetary and non-monetary rewards provided to you in recognition for your time, talents, efforts, and results.
Highlights of our benefits include:
Three weeks paid time off the first year
Medical, dental and vision insurance
401(k) Retirement Plan with 75" company match on your pre-tax and/or Roth contributions, up to the IRS limits
Employee Stock Investment Program
Tuition Assistance Program
Purchase of company funds with no sales charge
Onsite fitness center and recreation center*
Onsite cafeteria*
*Only applicable at certain locations

We believe that being a good corporate citizen is good business. To us, corporate citizenship means being accountable, serving our clients, being an employer of choice, managing our environmental impact, and supporting our communities. An emphasis on corporate citizenship is embedded in our culture and values, and is an important element of how we achieve success.
We are also committed to your learning and development with resources focused around Experience, Exposure, and Education, to help you achieve your professional development goals. Take some time to, meet some of our people, and see what it means to say, “I AM Franklin Templeton”.
Franklin Templeton is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We are committed to equal employment opportunity for all applicants and existing employees and we evaluate qualified applicants without regard to ancestry, age, color, disability, genetic information, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, marital status, medical condition, military or veteran status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, and any other basis protected by federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation. We invite you to visit us at http://www.franklintempletoncareers.com/ to learn more about our company and our career opportunities.

#LI-US
#ASSOCIATE,Charles Schwab is looking for a candidate excited about technology and looking to join an organization focused on strong customer service. The GDT Assistance in Data (AID) team provides technology solutions and data support for Schwab employees. The AID team is the first point of contact for internal customers with data questions, issues, or requests sourced from our analytic and big data systems. The AID team’s goal is to deliver an exceptional customer experience to maximize Schwab’s ability to leverage data as an asset for competitive advantage. This role is to act as the lead analyst designing the help desk engagement model, processes and tools. This role will also guide other staff members in service completion, process adherence and professional development.
In this newly created strategic role, the ideal candidate will define support process, procedures, and performance metrics whiling learning about our big data and data warehouse ecosystem.
You will have the opportunity to delight Schwab’s internal customers by empowering them with self-service data exploration tools and elevate Schwab’s data IQ level by connecting with end users, providing education opportunities about GDT data assets and delivering customer support services related to their data needs.

Putting the customer first; empathizing with the customer
Exercising patience during stressful situations
Developing processes/procedures for request intake, triage and assignment, escalation, and communication
Coaching junior team members on processes and service mindset
Strong oral and written communication skills
Having a friendly presence and helpful attitude; strong interpersonal skills and ability to work well with others
Demonstrating professional etiquette in the use of phones, chat, and email
Communicating complex technical issues in an easy to understand manner to customers with minimal technical knowledge
Multi-tasking and using our organizational tools effectively in a constantly changing environment
Executing the defined Service Desk processes with a strong attention to detail
Receiving constructive feedback and demonstrating improvement
Answering incoming requests, tracking information in the IT ticketing system, and resolving requests in a timely manner
Escalating unresolved issues to the proper escalated support team
Troubleshooting basic end user issues on various software applications,
Providing outstanding customer service and follow through on all issues to distributed GDT Team members
Triaging new issues and requests from inbound Service Desk and customer created incidents, providing immediate support according to the escalation process.
Troubleshooting end user query issues

Working knowledge of Data platforms such as Teradata, and Big Data platforms, Tableau, Collibra, Informatica and Business Objects
Intermediate skills in SQL
Ability to provide remote technical support over chat and phone
Troubleshoot moderate data issues
Strong communication skills
Strong customer focus
Strong trouble shooting & problem solving skills
Minimum 2 year technical development or support experience
Knowledge of Business Intelligence, Data Warehousing and Big Data tools
Bachelor s Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems.
1-4 years of progressive IT support experience.
Background in IT ticketing systems.