Title: Data Analyst

Position: 1+ Year Contract

Location: New York city, NY

Rate: $Open

Job Description:
Support the data collection, analysis and management needs for PA Traffic’s Lane Closure System, Analytics dashboards, Traffic Data Management System and Roadway Devices Management System
Coordinate with Traffic Engineering’s staff and other internal and external stakeholders to ensure prompt response to data requests.
Perform ad-hoc analysis and presenting results in a clear manner
Process, cleanse, and verify the integrity of data used for analysis
Perform data mining using scripting language
Extend data with third party sources of information when needed
Enhance data collection procedures to include information that is relevant for building
analytics dashboards
Must report 3-4 days a week at 4 World Trade Center in NY. 1-2 days a week can be from home
Requires a college undergraduate degree in Computer Science or a related degree
Requires 2-4 years of experience
English communication skills must be perfect
1 year contract to start with high change of multi-year approval,Non-Exempt*
Schedule: Can be 8a.m. – 5p.m. or 7a.m. – 4p.m. Monday - Friday.

Capital Systems Analyst
Overall responsibilities include providing systems support for the capital and project management systems within ***.

Roles and Responsibilities:

• Capital Systems Administration (Planview Enterprise One, Lean Kit, Project Place, Other)
• License and user permission management
• Functional configuration of Planview or other Capital Systems
• Administer Capital Systems SOX compliance process
• ServiceNow queue management and ticket resolution including working with IT on technical issues.
• Execute monthly financial uploads into Planview
• Provide System Help to users as well as training and job aids on Capricorn systems
• MS Power BI dashboard and reporting development and maintenance
• Participate on Capital Systems projects
• Create and upkeep work instructions and training documents
• Provide training to users
• Translate needs and best practices into tools & systems
• Facilitate continuous improvement of available tools and methods

Deliverables:

• Process improvement across the Capital Systems environment
• Capital System's administration
• Capital reporting and analysis
• Structure and methodology for document control and sharing
• Ongoing systems care to ensure continued value for ***

Education and Experience
• 3+ years of experience, preferably with software/ systems.
• 4-year degree
• Demonstrated system skills and knowledge
• Understanding of Capital projects, Project Management

Required Skills:

• Advanced Excel Skills including data analysis, formula functions, pivot tables, etc
• Quick Learner, self-starter.
• Technical curiosity for system capabilities. Ability to come up with innovative solutions.
• MS Power BI Dashboard development
• High attention to detail
• Problem solving and decision making

Desired Skills:

• SharePoint expertise
• Excel Macros, VBA
• MS Project experience
• ServiceNow queue management
• Basic Financial skills, especially in project costing
• Planview (Enterprise One, Lean Kit, Project Place) knowledge
• SQL Reporting
• Ability to Train others

Nesco Resource is an equal employment opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, age, or veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristics with respect to employment opportunities.,TSR is a premier National U.S. Staffing company with over 50 years of staffing excellence.Our client, a leading financial company is hiring a Big Data Analyst on a contract basis.Work Location:Weehawken, NJMust have:Data Science / Big Data ExperienceRecent hands on experience w/ Alteryx and PythonUndergraduate degree in Computer Science or Data ScienceExcellent communication skillsHighly preferred: DataRobot experienceYour roleDo you enjoy consulting and working on digital transformation projects? Are you looking for a unique opportunity to contribute to the firm's accelerating digital transformation? Are you passionate about new technologies like: Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Cognitive Automation, Advanced Analytics, Blockchain.Do you have hands on experience w/ Alteryx and Python?Your teamYou will be working in the brand new Digital Practice unit based in Weehawken. We are a dynamic and diverse team of transformation professionals with focus on emerging technology transformation. This unit is part of the broader newly created Group Internal Consulting department.Our practice teams help our firm's business functions implement their digital strategy and accomplish their ambitions in the areas of emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI), Advanced Data Analytics, Cognitive Automation and Blockchain. The Digital Practice is at the intersection of business, technology and innovative thinking. We accompany functions across all businesses to build a sustainable transformation; combining the power of emerging technologies with a profound understanding of the firm's businesses. The team works in in close collaboration with the different functions, business divisions and external parties to achieve its goals.Your expertise* At least 3 years of hands on consulting experience with a prominent or boutique consulting firm, with recent projects focused on digital transformation and new technologies.* Knowledge and hands on working experience in one or more of the following areas: Artificial Intelligence, Advanced Analytics, Cognitive Automation, Blockchain.* Recent hands on experience w/ Alteryx and Python* Strong data analytical background, attention to detail along with structured organization and planning skills.* Highly driven and motivated with a can-do attitude and eager to learn and to solve complex problems.* A strong written and verbal communicator, able to adapt and network across a global organization to work well with the team and to present well to stakeholders.A plus:* Experience with any of these tools is a plus: DataIKU, Tableau, DataRobot, Workfusion, re:infer, Teneo, AmeliaEducation:* Undergraduate degree: Computer Science, Data Science from a top tier universityPlease contact me directly if you are interested in learning more about this opportunity or to discuss our referral program if you know anyone that may be interested.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Junior Data Analyst in New York, NY.

This role is currently 100% remote and may switch back to office environment when COVID-19 ramps down.

Summary:
The Consultant will develop data artifacts (data dictionary) for the Data management and Quality program. The Analyst will be primarily responsible for the continuous improvement of our data driven strategic planning with the goals of increased visibility, flexibility and efficiency. The Data Analyst will work closely with Business Process Owners, Systems Architect, Functional Team, Application Developers and Support team to build and support the strategic approaches and methods to a variety of analyses.

Key Tasks:
Essential duties include preparing forecasts and analyzes data trends, identify data anomalies and conduct deep dive data analysis
Participate in high level business analysis and assist with benchmarking KPIs
Carefully analyze the data and draw conclusions, communicating the results in a clear, concise and actionable manner
Collate, cleanse and organize data from several sources
Working in cross functional project teams that include ETL development, Data Quality Assurance, and Data visualization
Communicate directly with team members/support team to diagnose and resolve issues
Work with other team members to continually improve our delivery and processes
Actively participate on project team meetings to achieve team goals
Compliance with business policies and industry standard best practices with regard to data security
Use analytic tools such as Tableau and SAS for through data analysis and visualization
Create and maintain documentation of data governance procedures, policies, and adaptation
Off hours and on call production support may be required
Adherence to internal and external production SLAs
Limited travel may be required
REQUIREMENTS:
A High School diploma and full-time enrollment pursuing a Bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering, Business Administration, or related disciplines
Knowledge working with large volume data and helping businesses make better data driven decisions
Strong knowledge troubleshooting and problem-solving skills
Experience with various data platforms
Proficiency in PL/SQL coding
Proficiency in statistical analysis tool such as Python or R
Willingness to participate in team on-call rotation, and perform off hours work as needed
Strong technical and project management/process leadership skills
Excellent troubleshooting and problem-solving skills
Knowledge of healthcare industry systems and applications is a plus
Ability to work within a diverse, technically oriented, team setting is a must
Demonstrated ability to take ownership of incidents, coordinate effective response, and drive improvements through root cause analysis and lessons learned
The ability to quickly absorb new changes in computer technologies is necessary
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Duration: 5 Months

Schedule: Can be 8a.m. – 5p.m. or 7a.m. – 4p.m. Monday - Friday.

Capital Systems Analyst

Overall responsibilities include providing systems support for the capital and project management systems within Client.

Roles and Responsibilities:

• Capital Systems Administration (Planview Enterprise One, Lean Kit, Project Place, Other)

• License and user permission management

• Functional configuration of Planview or other Capital Systems

• Administer Capital Systems SOX compliance process

• ServiceNow queue management and ticket resolution including working with IT on technical issues.

• Execute monthly financial uploads into Planview

• Provide System Help to users as well as training and job aids on Capricorn systems

• MS Power BI dashboard and reporting development and maintenance

• Participate on Capital Systems projects

• Create and upkeep work instructions and training documents

• Provide training to users

• Translate needs and best practices into tools & systems

• Facilitate continuous improvement of available tools and methods

Deliverables:

• Process improvement across the Capital Systems environment

• Capital System’s administration

• Capital reporting and analysis

• Structure and methodology for document control and sharing

• Ongoing systems care to ensure continued value for Corning

Education and Experience

• 3+ years of experience, preferably with software/ systems.

• 4-year degree

• Demonstrated system skills and knowledge

• Understanding of Capital projects, Project Management

Required Skills:

• Advanced Excel Skills including data analysis, formula functions, pivot tables, etc

• Quick Learner, self-starter.

• Technical curiosity for system capabilities. Ability to come up with innovative solutions.

• MS Power BI Dashboard development

• High attention to detail

• Problem solving and decision making

Desired Skills:

• SharePoint expertise

• Excel Macros, VBA

• MS Project experience

• ServiceNow queue management

• Basic Financial skills, especially in project costing

• Planview (Enterprise One, Lean Kit, Project Place) knowledge

• SQL Reporting

• Ability to Train others,"This role is currently work-from-home and will move to the office environment after the COVID-19 restrictions are lifted.

6 month contract
Responsibilities:
Partner with senior business sponsors, platform supervision, and business management to enhance and support a highly visible front office Big Data project and trade blotter application
Attend regular meetings and interface with various front office users and technical teams related to the project
Effectively coordinate and work with Front Office users, operations, and compliance professionals.
Complete detailed documentation required for various phases of the SDLC
Effectively solicit and gather business requirements from relevant stakeholders
Analyze and document user requirements and determine systems needs
Test new / enhanced surveillance scenarios and assist developers "de-bug .
Setup JAD session with relevant stakeholders
Provide Technical Documentation as needed
Develop UAT test plans and test scripts for users to perform.
Coordinate UAT with required stakeholders and hold status meetings to assess progress.
Provide functional support for new releases and liaise with developers as needed.
Work on multiple projects and respect aggressive schedule where support may include extra hours, nights and weekends.
Minimum required qualifications
Experience with Front Office traders, IT support and Operation teams in a Capital Markets domain.
Knowledge and experience in regulatory reporting field.
Strong written communication skills in front office setting.
Experience in conducting detailed business and operational analysis for problem identification, system deployment and system enhancement.
Experience in compiling detailed documentation that supports the business analysis.
Advanced Project Management skills
Advanced data analysis skills in Excel, SQL and database skills (SQL Server, Oracle, Postgres)
Ability to manage conflicting requests on time in a continually fast moving environment
Must be a self-starter with attention to detail

Preferred qualifications:
Strong knowledge of capital markets products and processes
Strong knowledge of capital markets regulatory environment pertaining to trades, orders , and reporting requirements
Advanced experience with SDLC process including working closely with developers, IT support, and architects
Experience with programming languages including JAVA, J2EE, Python or others is a plus
Experience with Big Data, Machine Learning, AI or robotics projects is a plus,Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Jersey City, NJ+ salary:$46 - $56 per hour+ date posted:Thursday, July 9, 2020+ job type:Contract+ industry:Finance and Insurance+ reference:789194**job description**Data Analystjob summary:**Summary:**+ Role in Financial Technology / Economic Sanctions. Looking for a Data Analyst who will turn data into information, information into insight and insight into comprehensive senior management & stakeholder reporting.+ The candidate should have a minimum of 5-10 years of relevant experience where they have performed data analysis and reconciliation within a financial institute middle office or operations group.+ The candidate should also have experience completing business analysis, creating requirements for developers, and following through to ensure work completed successfully and any data issues or requirements resolved.location: Jersey City, New Jerseyjob type: Contractsalary: $46 - 56 per hourwork hours: 8am to 5pmeducation: Bachelorsresponsibilities:**Responsibilities**+ Data Profiling/analysis - Collect & Interpret data, analyze results using analytical techniques and provide ongoing results in a comprehensive manner. Working closely with Financial Crimes Analysts and Quantitative Modelers to review business requirements and data needs.+ Business Analysis- understand and work with business, risk, developers, other team members to complete analysis, create requirements, and follow through to ensure work completed successfully and on time for projects.+ Experience working in Technology with Anti Money Laundering and Economic Sanctions knowledge a plus. Working knowledge of various financial instruments / products across Capital Markets, Retail and Wholesale Wealth Management, etc. such as Securities, Derivatives, Credit card, Real time payments, Person to Person payments, etc.qualifications:**Skills Required: Add:**+ Perform Reconciliations - Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and determine breaks.+ Ensures that all data management activities are completed on time and with high quality (project management skills required to ensure timeline meets expectations)+ Discrepancy Management identify issues or break reasons. Ownership of issues until remediated and appropriate resolutions are implemented+ Metrics reporting Identify and interpret trends or patterns in data sets, prepare reporting data tables and create reports. Responsible for month-end stakeholders meetings.+ Work with management on multiple deliverables under tight deadline and report out in a timely manner+ Manage processes, improve methods and procedures. Locate and define new process improvement and automation opportunities and work with development partners to implement. Develop standards.skills: **Skills Required**+ Working knowledge of Capital Markets trading products+ Experience with Risk management disciplines are a plus+ Strong critical thinking and data analysis skills. Experienced in collecting, organizing, and evaluating business data+ Experience working and coordinating with various teams to ensure all work is completed and meets various expected timelines+ Experience completing requirements for Developers and following through to ensure completed correctly+ Ability to pay attention to details+ Ability to report research results in a comprehensive, concise manner and to develop and present precise and clear metrics+ Skilled in coordinating and multi-tasking for various projects+ Understands databases; good technical skills in querying and analyzing data (SQL or equivalent) and strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc.)+ Ability to manage issues and influence others to remediate+ Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing. Communicates and collaborates with all levels of team-mates+ Good organizational and project management skills, as well as attention to detail+ Multitasks, prioritizes and meets deadlines in timely mannerEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Title: Data analyst with Python

Job Type: 6+Months Contract

Location: New York City

Rate: $Open/hour

Requirements

Job Description:
Experience with SQL (Teradata, Oracle)
Familiarity with Python frameworks such as Django, Flask, Pyramid.
Understanding of the threading limitations of Python, and multi-process architecture
Excellent analytical and troubleshooting skills
Familiarity with event-driven programming in Python
Benefits

Note: If interested please send your updated resume arun.kumar@two95intl.com and include your rate requirement along with your contact details with a suitable time when we can reach you. If you know of anyone in your sphere of contacts, who would be a perfect match for this job then, we would appreciate if you can forward this posting to them with a copy to us.,BA/Data Analyst
Our client, a global provider of information technology products and services, is seeking a BA/Data Analyst

Location: New York, NY
Position Type: Contract

Summary:

This job requires a detail-oriented mindset with a high level of interest in data analysis and marketing.

Responsibilities:

-Collecting, inspecting, cleansing, transforming and modeling of complex data sets
-Identify useful information in data sets and suggest conclusions that support decision making

Qualifications and requirement:

-Advanced Microsoft Excel skills - macros, master pivot tables etc.
-Tableau, SQL, business intelligence software skills a plus
-Experience with quantitative and qualitative data
-General knowledge of and experience with various marketing channels and data
-Demonstrate organizational, analytical a conceptual ability
-Strong attention to detail
-Highly effective verbal and written communicator
-Ability to work effectively in a team environment as well as independently on assigned projects
-Ability to meet deadlines, prioritize workloads and achieve results in a fast-paced, dynamic ever changing environment.
-Advanced use of Microsoft Excel and various business intelligence and analytical tools
-Willingness to solve problems

Education:

-Bachelor’s degree with focus on analytics, marketing or data management.
-Master’s degree a plus,Job Description


Job #: 1076857

Role: Financial Data Analyst

Location: NY or NJ (Remote for now)

Duration: 1 year + contract

Client: Large Financial Services Client

*If you are interested in this role, please send your resume to kbreck@apexsystems.com*
Highly analytical

Excellent knowledge of capital markets with extensive knowledge in Credit Risk and product knowledge of OTC products - This is a must

Experience working in Object oriented or Python environment - Good to have.

Intermediate SQL and Excel is a must.

Deliverables may include authoring business requirements, documenting RAID points and providing workflow diagrams.

Lead agile development efforts for one or more enterprise-level development initiatives. Responsible for sprint planning, resource allocation, execution and releases

Able to work independently without a lot of manager oversight

Quick learner

Resource needed to perform analysis, data quality reconciliations and issue remediation on Quartz data to meet the deliverables as part of the overall IMM program

Top 3 Must Have Skillsets Required :

Data analysis, knowledge of OTC product, SQL, worked in credit risk

Ex: Java; CCAR; OTC; Agile; SQL

Level of Experience Needed (highlight)

8-10 years

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Job Description
Job Description

The Data Integration Engineer is a self-motivated individual responsible for the design, development, and support of data integration solutions. Partners with internal business units, analysts, vendors, and key stakeholders to understand their information requirements to independently design, develop and implement data integration solutions that support our platforms resiliency, stability, and supportability; using a variety of ETL and database technologies. Their work will support business decisions and could span across multiple areas such as consumer experience, clinical quality, hospital operations, supply chain, finance, etc. Datastage, SQL, DB2, or other technologies.

Works with business sponsors, SMES and application teams; to understand the business requirements; analyze and assess availability, quality, and lineage of source system data. Design, map data from source to target and develop data integration solutions that meet business needs. Develop and socialize data integration standards.

Support production Data Warehouse applications and utilize tools to proactively manage source system changes, optimize applications and ensure availability, accuracy, security, and acceptable performance. Contributes information to the data governance software to improve knowledge downstream.

Qualifications/Requirements
The ideal candidate will possess the following qualifications

· Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration, Information Science, Computer Science, Computer Engineering, Information Technology, or relevant field is Required. OR

· Master's Degree in Business Administration, Information Science, Computer Science, Computer Engineering, Information Technology, or relevant field is Preferred.

· 3 Years Working as a Data Integration Engineer or Data Integration Production Support Engineer with a Bachelor's degree is Required.

· Experience working in a healthcare or related field is Preferred.

· Teradata Database Experience Preferred.

· Experience upgrading IBM Infosphere Tools is Preferred.

Skills
Proficient with interviewing and gathering business requirements, definition and design of data source and data flow, data quality analysis, and working with the data architect on the development of logical data models.
· Proficient using Infosphere/DataStage or equivalent ETL software

· Experience with IBM Data Studio, CI/CD pipeline, DataStage
Experience with object-oriented/object function scripting languages: Python, Scala, etc.
· Experience with big data tools: Hadoop, Spark, Kafka
Proficient with relational databases and using SQL to query, create tables, views, indexes, joins.
Proficient using Unix and applicable scripting/scheduling tools.
Experience with the SDLC, ITSM and privacy and security concepts.
· No Sponsorship or C2C available for this opportunity
Company Description
Search Current Career Opportunities: http://w.ektello.com/search-jobs,Description Robert Half Technology is looking for a Data Engineer for a contract to hire opportunity with one of our Midtown, Media clients. If you are interested in the position, please forward an updated resume to moshe.smolarcikrht.com. Requirements - SQL, Python, R or similar - Advanced Excel skills -No sponsorship available Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.comjobstechnology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer MFDisabilityVeterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use httpswww.roberthalf.comterms-of-use .,We are looking for a contract Data Analyst to join our team for a 6-month (or longer) engagement with the option to convert to a full-time role.

What’s The Job?

You will work directly with a team of 24 engineers and report directly to the VP of Data Analytics.

The role is broken down into 4 areas of work:
Working with new data sets from vendors
Ad-Hoc Analysis
Updating ETL Jobs
Performing data quality checks


Who We Are

At the head of the Media/ad-tech industry, we use the most cutting edge tools and technology to guarantee we are the best at what we do. We are in charge with overseeing advanced advertising sales across all properties, with access to unique data that sets us apart from all of our competitors.

What Skills Do You Need?

R (primary & most important)
SQL
AWS


Nice to haves:

Tableau
Understanding of Data Bricks
Compensation:

$40 - $65/hour

You will be paid bi-weekly

How to Apply

We are hiring very quickly for this role, and all resumes will be reviewed within 24 hours and initial interviews will be performed within 48-72 hours. The intent is to hire someone within the next 7-14 days.

If interested, please apply directly!,Job Description
Market Data Analyst with strong background in Financial Inventory

Responsibilities:
Maintain inventory tracking system and ensure that it stays updated by tracking user ID’s, passwords, costs, user lists, usage reports, contract terms, vendor contacts, invoices, allocation percentages, etc. for all market data services/products managed by the team.
Exchange reporting on a monthly basis
Process and reconcile invoices using the inventory tracking system and work with the central finance function on workflow improvement.
Ensure that the Market data GL is only charged for Market data services
Assist with the management of the market data order process for end-users of subscription services by updating the inventory and permissioning systems and ensuring that invoice amounts are correct
Create/distribute scheduled and ad-hoc reports from our inventory tracking system that will be used by all levels of management both within the team as well as the various stakeholders supported. These reports will be used for budgeting and financial planning purposes, contract renewals, etc.
Contribute to, guide and support the contract renewal process globally including informing applicable team members on timing for re-negotiation and re-evaluation of existing contracts.
Create monthly market data reports for department heads; make updates or changes as necessary.
Strong Financial Information Tracking System (FITS) knowledge and skills are essential,Buyside - Data Scientist/Research Analyst

Location: New York, United States

Salary: US$180000 - US$280000 per annum + competitive

Sectors: Asset Management

Job Type: Permanent

Apply for this Job
We're currently working closely with a prestigious investment fund seeking top data scientists/analysts. The ideal candidate has fundamental experience with a strong data science skillset. These positions are based in the NYC/tristate area.

If you have experience conducting fundamental equity or quantamental research, we'd like to talk to you! We're particuarly excited if you've worked with alternative data and large unstructured datasets. We prefer individuals with an established track record in finance and a strong engineering/data science background/toolkit.

This is an exceptional opportunity to solve problems related to alpha generation and trading, and advance data driven products. We are seeking individuals with hands-on, high-impact, data driven applications in industry and academia.

You will have the opportunity to partner up with quant researchers, technologists, and academics beyond traditional finance to develop creative solutions to the world's most challenging economic problems across markets and industries. Additionally, you will have the flexibility and opportunity for tremendous career growth.

The ideal candidate / successful individual will have experience with:
Minimum of a Bachelor's or Master's Degree in STEM programs (ie. Applied Mathematics, Economics, Statistics, Engineering, Neuroscience, or relevant degree)
4-10 years of experience in a fundamental research or data science role
Heavy experience with Python, R, SQL
Experience applying statistical methods to properiety data and deriving actionable insights, communicating analysis to researchers and PMs
STRONG communication skills are a must!


Good to have:
PhD in Computer Science, Statistics, Economics, etc.
Bonus points for experience working with alternative, nontraditional data sources
Ability to wear multiple hats, self-starter mentality
Ability work in a fast paced environment and create projects from scratch
Sthree US is acting as an Employment Agency in relation to this vacancy.

Apply for this Job,Job Description
Must be proficient in Advanced Excel – Pivot, dashboarding, macro writing

Must be able to analytical to help Director understand trends in dataset on a weekly basis
Must understand databases to help the team build out certain reports from
Must be an effective communicator – will need to help facilitate and take notes in two key meetings weekly.
Must be a good problem solver. Need help to solve some of our challenges with manual excel files and identify way of automation or improvements
Preferred data analytics degree – help with future initiatives
Preferred knowledge of SharePoint 2010 – help build out Internal Audit SharePoint site and navigate existing SharePoint applications
Preferred knowledge of Tableau – Help IA with dashboarding
Preferred knowledge of Microsoft Power BI Desktop – help with dash boarding
Preferred knowledge of GRC Tools

Summary: Responsible for conducting research and root cause analysis for customers with
the goal of recommending and implementing new processes and solutions to
operational deficiencies. Resolves issues and improves operational performance
on a cross-functional/departmental basis. This is a senior level position
working independently with guidance only in the most complex situations.
Responsibilities: - Investigate service related issues to identify root cause of issues; identify
and communicate business needs assessments as necessary.
Develop forecasting tools using current technology/systems (Access, Excel,
Monarch, etc.)
Translate business requirements and assist IT with the development of
technical specifications.
Develop solutions based on data analysis to increase business efficiency.
Lead or participate in internal and external project workgroup(s) and
presentations.
Conduct User Acceptance Testing (UAT) for projects, implementations, system
fixes and enhancements, etc.
Prepare materials for internal and external audit activities; review audit
findings/reports for accuracy and completeness. If appropriate, formulate
rebuttal and/or corrective action steps.
May coach/mentor less experienced staff, assist in on-boarding of new staff
and/or distribute and follow-up on work assignments.
Perform other relevant tasks as assigned by management.
Qualifications: Education:
Bachelor's degree required.
Experience:
Minimum of seven (7) years' experience in an operational role, or analytical
role
Knowledge:
Knowledge of Healthcare industry required
Knowledge of Project Management methodologies
Requires knowledge of Healthcare firm’s products and services
Requires working knowledge of division operating plan and firm’s operating
model.,Provide analytical support to senior management personnel
Deliver regular and ad hoc reports to business leaders
Ensure that the market data received is researched and meets the clients' specifications
Control business intelligence tools and support systems implementations to improve the way we provide insights to our customers,Software Guidance Assistance, Inc., (SGA), is searching for a Data Analyst wCapital Marketsfor a contract assignment with one of our premier financial services clients in Jersey City, NJ. Responsibilities Develop Subject Matter Expertise on the key data elements that are consumed for reporting data to external and internal clients Ensure adherence to and develop best practices supporting the Project Management Standards Ensure the business reporting needs are met with the most elegant and timely technology solutions Ensuring proper development life cycle is followed with artefacts to support Internal Audit and any inquiries Gather business requirements, perform detailed analysis, and produce associated functional specifications across multiple functions. Go-live support, investigation of issues. Participation in large-scale "highly-visible SITUAT testing cycles managing technology and business stakeholders Partner with business technology leads globally to deliver an E2E solution. Partner with business, technology and quant stakeholders to suggest innovative solutions to existing issues Produce implementation approach, timelines, go-live strategy. Project management oversight of the deliverables resources distributed across many different technology teams across the front to back application stack. Provide regular updates to senior management in technology, middle office front office Training of relevant teams prior to go-live of new business processesproducts, functionality or applications Work as lead business analystproject manager in the Olympus team supporting reporting for external and internal clients Work with Data Governance and Quality teams to understand data issues Work with technology leads across various teams to accomplish the reporting objective Work with various technology leads to ensure the gaps in the data completeness or accuracy are converted into prioritized Book of Work items Required Skills 10+ years of business data analysis experience in large technology ecosystems Significant Business Analysis experience across the full project lifecycle (requirements, design, development, testing and deployment). Experience with Global Markets, Private Bank, Payments or Securities Services Product Knowledge preferred. Other general Financial Services experience should be coupled with other qualifications in this list. Any understanding of regulatory constraints and experience in delivering regulatory projects is extremely desirable (MiFID II, SFTR, SDRE (EMIR, CFTC, Volcker, etc.) but not mandatory Front, Middle and Back Office exposure, if any, will be required Exceptional skills on Microsoft Office Excel, Word, Project, Visio, PowerPoint. Should be highly analytical and be able to individually to produce needed insights from the data. Strong SQL with experience working with RDBMS such as Oracle, Sybase, Netezza expected Experience working with teams supporting Business Intelligence platforms such as Tableau, QlikView, Microstrategy, will be a plus A history of delivering against agreed objectives Any applications development experience will be helpful. If not as a developer, experience Ability to leverage strong interpersonal collaboration skills in a fast-paced team environment Ability to multi-task and work under pressure Ability to pick up new concepts and apply the knowledge. Comfortable in presenting suggestions for change and or improving work flow Demonstrated leadership skills at the selected level Enthusiastic and proactive approach with willingness to learn Excellent analytical and process-based skills, i.e. process flow diagrams, business modelling, and functional design Excellent communication skills (there is a requirement to be Business facing) Excellent organizational and multi-tasking skills with tremendous attention to detail Familiarity or the ability to quickly understand and formulate application level requirements pertaining to complex workflows, or integration with external applications Problem-solving and facilitation skills Proficient at writing and delivering business requirement documents and presentations Proven delivery record of multiple projects involving process change and technology enhancements. Proven interpersonal skills with ability to partner and influence across organizational lines Self-motivation and prioritization of tasks and actions to hit deadlines according to business priorities The candidate is expected to be dynamic, flexible with a high energy level as this is a demanding and rapidly changing environment Thoroughness and organization is expected, as well as sound judgment SGA is a Certified Women's Business Enterprise (WBE) celebrating over thirty years of service to our national client base for both permanent placement and consulting opportunities. For consulting positions, we offer a variety of benefit options including but not limited to health dental insurance, paid vacation, timely payment via direct deposit. SGA accepts transfers of H1 sponsorship for most contracting roles. We are unable to sponsor for Right-to-Hire, Fulltime, or Government roles. All parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply for all roles. Only those authorized to work for government entities will be considered for government roles. Please inquire about our referral program if you would like to submit a candidate for any of our open or future job opportunities. SGA is an EEO employer. We encourage Veterans to apply. To view all of our available job postings andor to learn more about SGA please visit us online at www.sgainc.com httpwww.sgainc.com .,TSR is a premier National U.S. Staffing company with over 50 years of staffing excellence.

Our client, a leading Financial Services company is hiring a Data Management Analyst- Reference Data (Junior role) for 6 month on a contract basis.

Work Location: Getzville, NY

Job Description:

Data Management: Clean the data that is already in the system and meetall regulatory requirements, ensuringreference data across a variety of systems remain up to date.
Work with teams in EMEA and Manila to ensure that all maintenance is performed in a timely and consistent manner.
Identify, research, validate, setup & maintain legal entity reference data (leveraging internal/ external stakeholders and data sources) on central repositories/ applications; legal entity data forms an integral component of Credit Risk exposure; typically data spans legal name verification, address, nature of business, ownership etc.
Liaise with internal/ external stakeholders to provide exception management reconciliation/ reporting.
Conduct analysis to map front to back data flows and provide subject matter expertise, providing input to project requirements to drive business, functional and/ or system/ platform changes.
Perform quality reviews/ refresh of client reference data and our supporting processes/procedures.
Support the delivery of projects spanning : Market/ Regulatory initiatives, Technology/ Platform roll outs, migrations between various internal/ external sources; responsibility may include coordination and input on project delivery (planning, analysis, requirements gathering, governance, status reporting, scheduling etc).
Skills:

Entry level with Bachelors degree in Finance or related areas with strong data analysis and excel skills will be considered.
Strong Microsoft skills: Word, Excel, PowerPoint.
Strong focus on Control.
Proven project and process management skills.
Good communication skills with the ability to be assertive.
Organized with an excellent attention to detail.
Ability to focus on high quality work while under pressure.
Comfortable working with large quantities of data.
Comfortable working independently in a dynamic and challenging environment.
Please contact me directly if you are interested in learning more about this opportunity or to discuss our referral program if you know anyone that may be interested.

Regards,
Bonani Dutta
Technical Recruiter
646-668-4351
bdutta@tsrconsulting.com,· Lead the identification and root-cause analysis of data quality issues arising through the data chain, from source system to final report.

· Prioritizing data issues and collaborating with business and technology stakeholders to address and remediate issues in a timely manner based on priority and severity.

· Work in conjunction with data consumers and Domain stakeholders to support data quality rules, standards, and thresholds to ensure appropriate data quality monitoring practices are in place.

· Actively tracking regulatory changes and anticipating the impact these will have on the Domain’s data governance and reporting.

§ Financial industry experience is required.

§ A recognized under-graduate degree in business, mathematics, computer science, or a related discipline.

§ A recognized post-graduate or master’s degree in business, finance, CFA, and/or FRM would be an asset.

§ Knowledge of Compliance standards and best practices, with use of analysis tools for monitoring.

§ Knowledge of the Bank's financial instruments, capital markets, and wholesale operational processes & controls.

§ Knowledge of regulatory/liquidity reporting (e.g., 2052A, Liquidity Stress Test, Reg YY, etc.).

§ Knowledge of AML/ATF legislation regulatory requirements related projects.

§ Knowledge of requirements gathering, design methodology, and building test cases - detail oriented, analytical, and capable of investigating complex / technical issues.

§ Able to troubleshoot data related issues and support in the authorization in maintenance and modifications.

§ Good communication / presentation skills (both oral and written).

§ Excellent team player by working with cross-departmental business & IT stakeholders.

§ Highly motivated and committed; capable of working in a dynamic environment with aggressive timelines and multiple work streams running in parallel.

§ Experience with eliciting and provided requirements and design - detail oriented, analytical, and capable of investigating complex / business issue.,TSR is a premier National U.S. Staffing company with over 50 years of staffing excellence.Our client, a leading Financial Services company is hiring a Big Data Programmer Analyst on an initial 1-year contract.Work Location: Jersey City, NJ (Will begin remote)Must have* 4+ years of hands on experience in Big Data / Hadoop ecosystem* Expert in high volume data processing (real-time & batch), performance optimization.* Excellent knowledge of Spark / Spark Streaming* Proficient understanding of hadoop ecosystem and related tech stack including spark, HBase, Hive, Sqoop, Flume, Impala, kafka etc.* Well versed with big data design patterns* Analytical and problem solving skills* Hands on experience with Java and SQLs* Have experience in working with huge data (>500 TB)* Working experience using frameworks like AngularJS, React, JQuery, etc. is beneficial* Experience in programmatically interfacing with BI reporting tools, charting libs is a plus* Good understanding of Java / JEE along with common frameworks like spring, hibernate, jackson, jerseyNice to have* Knowledge/experience with other big data platforms like redshift, bigquery* Experience with platform migration to bigdata* Experience with performance testing and tuning* No SQL databases like mongodb,Apache beamPlease contact me directly if you are interested in learning more about this opportunity or to discuss our referral program if you know anyone that may be interested.Kevin GrantSenior Recruiter646-668-4337kgrant@tsrconsulting.com,Data Governance Analyst

Job Number: 20-05386

Want to be part of the Energy Industry? Eclaro is looking for a Data Governance Analyst for our client in White Plains, NY.

Eclaro's Client is America's largest state power organization and is a national leader in energy efficiency and clean energy technology. If you’re up to the challenge, then take a chance at this rewarding opportunity!

Position Overview:
The Enterprise Data Governance Project aims to enable Client to manage its "Data-As-An-Asset and to build the foundation for an enterprise data analytics platform at Client.
This program will focus on enabling data stewardship, improving the quality of our data assets, increasing data security and protection, simplifying data integration and establishing better audit trail on data usage at Client
This program will implement Data Governance & Data Integration tools and processes to provide data owners and data consumers the ability to provision and access high quality, well-governed data for their day-to-day operations.
In addition, it will help establish a strong foundation upon which to build a world-class Data Analytics capability that turns data into business insights more efficiently and effectively.
Responsibilities:
Execution of the Data Discovery Project Phase 2
Conduct data discovery stakeholder interviews with business and IT stakeholders (selected applications)
Identify data sets, develop data flows, understand data-related processes and identify key data issues for each application
Update of Enterprise Data Flow diagrams and Enterprise Data Catalog inventory
Creation of Application Playback decks and Data Discovery report & presentation
Enablement of Data Roles within Client
Maintenance of datasets and data roles in the Enterprise Data Catalog - additions, updates and deletions
Identification of updates / changes to existing data roles for the datasets in the Client Data Catalog
Perform onboarding, transition and education of Client stakeholders for the Data Roles at the enterprise (Data Owner, Data Steward, Data Custodian)
Conduct of quarterly Data Owner meetings to communicate upcoming Data Governance initiatives / processes / policies / best practices
Lead in onboarding and implementation of Collibra Data Governance tool
Onboarding of new datasets into Data Governance tool
Establishment of Data Catalog and shop-for-data feature in Data Governance tool
Manage metadata ingestion (manual and automated) from different sources
Creation of new workflows in Collibra Data Governance tool
New custom workflow for Data Access Request
New custom workflow for Business Glossary from proposal to approval
New custom workflow for asset creation, review and validation
Training and onboarding of Client stakeholders to Collibra
Development of new Data Governance Policies, Procedures and Standards
Develop and operationalize new Data Access Request process
Design of new Enterprise Data Request Process, based on ongoing pilot feedback
Implementation of new Data Request Process - app by app working with application owners and business stakeholders
Communication and training of all enterprise users on new Data Request Process
Development and execution of Change Management plan for Data Discovery, Data Access Request and operationalization of new Data Governance workflows
Required Skills:
Strong knowledge of Data Governance & Quality - policies, processes and tools
Strong experience & expertise in using Collibra Data Governance tool
Knowledge (experience preferred) using Trillium Data Quality tool and integration with Collibra
Working experience in implementing Data Governance policies and processes
Strong presentation & communication skills
Ability to work with Senior Leaders
Experience working on teams that work under Agile principles
If hired, you will enjoy the following Eclaro Benefits:
401k Retirement Savings Plan administered by Merrill Lynch
Commuter Check Pretax Commuter Benefits
Eligibility to purchase Medical, Dental & Vision Insurance through Eclaro
If interested, you may contact:

Eric Jones

Ejones@eclaroit.com

212-901-3838

Eric Jones | LinkedIn

Equal Opportunity Employer: Eclaro values diversity and does not discriminate based on Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Business Analyst-Market Data

Our client, one of the largest financial services firms, is seeking a Business Analyst-Market Data

Location: Jersey City, NJ

Position Type: Contract

Position Overview:

The Olympus Markets Data Strategy team is building a next generation Data Fabric to solve the evolving Business, Analytical and Regulatory needs of Institutional Clients Group (ICG). The Fabric will bring together disparate data sources for the Global Markets & Institutional Clients organization and enable industry-leading analytics, client reporting, regulatory, surveillance, supervisory reporting(s) and data science solutions. One of the data sources - Market data will support Transaction Monitoring capability within the 1st Line of Defense (1LOD) to ensure appropriate risk-based global coverage of market manipulation and abuse behavior’s, complementing the 2nd Line of Defense (2LOD) Trade Surveillance function.

Job Summary:

The ideal candidate will have 10+ years of Financial Services experience as well as a deep background in dealing with Market data across asset classes like Equities, Rates, and FX etc. Experience implementing of Market data solutions and working with known Market Data vendors like Reuters, Bloomberg etc. is required. Kafka and Hadoop knowledge is a huge plus. The candidate will work closely with the product owner, other Business Analysts, Internal technology teams, and core developers. Strong analytical and stakeholder management skills are essential in order to be successful in this role.,Nesco Resource is seeking a Data Analyst for a well-regarded biotechnology firm in the Capital District. This is a one year contract position with the potential for extension or permanent hire.

The Data Analyst will:
Compile internally and externally generated data in support of compiling CofAs and SofAs
Prepare and provide CofAs and SofAs for all lot release materials
Work with members of manufacturing, QA, RA, and R/D to provide updates/status of CofAs, SofAs, testing issues, etc.
Trend QC product release data to support lot release and regulatory filings
Act as a liaison between multiple groups to provide trending analyses to support various activities
Assist in the implementation and maintenance of product release data trending program
Presents trending data at the in-depth product review
Write product annual release data trending reports
Write lot specific data trending reports for each lot to be released
Prepare and populate matrices (databases, spreadsheets) designed to track testing and review status
Compile data to support QC department metrics and performance tracking
Ensures compliance with applicable cGMP regulations and SOPs
Maintain and update relevant SOPs for data review and reporting as needed
Meet specified timelines to support release and regulatory filings
Complies with all pertinent regulatory agency requirements
Education and Experience:
Requires Bachelors degree in Chemistry, Biology or related field and some relevant work experience
Experience working in a cGMP pharmaceutical Quality Control Laboratory is preferred but not required
Nesco Resource is an equal employment opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, age, or veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristics with respect to employment opportunities.,Position Summary

A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.

Job Responsibilities:

Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders

Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis

Learn new data related skills and processes

Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis

Share and teach skills to others on the data team

Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals

Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients

Requirements:

A College degree (required)

5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)

Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data

MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)

Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)

Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics

Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction

Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers

Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss

Passion about our mission to improve people's lives

Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Specialty: Clerical
Sub Specialty(s): Business Analyst- Associate,Job Description:

TOP 4 MUST HAVES:
High attention to detail
Proficient with Windows environment
Advanced with Microsoft Excel
Good Communication (verbal and non verbal)
Nice to have: Familiarity with SharePoint

Responsibilities:
Review 40-60 work orders, analyze field reports, make changes to work orders accordingly.
Analysis and manipulation using multiple data sources in Excel; will require use of VLOOKUP and filtering techniques
Generation of template files and downloading and pre-processing of multiple datasets
Send manager reports once a week on completed work orders.
Other responsibilities may be assigned with time.
Will be using: Infor, SharePoint, and Excel heavily,Job Title: Data Governance Analyst
Location: White Plains, NY
Duration: 5+ Months

Project Overview:
The Enterprise Data Governance Project aims to enable CLIENT to manage its "Data-As-An-Asset and to build the foundation for an enterprise data analytics platform at CLIENT.
This program will focus on enabling data stewardship, improving the quality of our data assets, increasing data security and protection, simplifying data integration and establishing better audit trail on data usage at CLIENT
This program will implement Data Governance & Data Integration tools and processes to provide data owners and data consumers the ability to provision and access high quality, well-governed data for their day-to-day operations.
In addition, it will help establish a strong foundation upon which to build a world-class Data Analytics capability that turns data into business insights more efficiently and effectively.
Job Description:
Execution of the Data Discovery Project Phase 2
Conduct data discovery stakeholder interviews with business and IT stakeholders (selected applications)
Identify data sets, develop data flows, understand data-related processes and identify key data issues for each application
Update of Enterprise Data Flow diagrams and Enterprise Data Catalog inventory
Creation of Application Playback decks and Data Discovery report & presentation
Enablement of Data Roles within CLIENT
Maintenance of datasets and data roles in the Enterprise Data Catalog - additions, updates and deletions
Identification of updates / changes to existing data roles for the datasets in the CLIENT Data Catalog
Perform onboarding, transition and education of CLIENT stakeholders for the Data Roles at the enterprise (Data Owner, Data Steward, Data Custodian)
Conduct of quarterly Data Owner meetings to communicate upcoming Data Governance initiatives / processes / policies / best practices
Lead in onboarding and implementation of Collibra Data Governance tool
Onboarding of new datasets into Data Governance tool
Establishment of Data Catalog and shop-for-data feature in Data Governance tool
Manage metadata ingestion (manual and automated) from different sources
Creation of new workflows in Collibra Data Governance tool
New custom workflow for Data Access Request
New custom workflow for Business Glossary from proposal to approval
New custom workflow for asset creation, review and validation
Training and onboarding of CLIENT stakeholders to Collibra
Development of new Data Governance Policies, Procedures and Standards
Develop and operationalize new Data Access Request process
Design of new Enterprise Data Request Process, based on ongoing pilot feedback
Implementation of new Data Request Process - app by app working with application owners and business stakeholders
Communication and training of all enterprise users on new Data Request Process
Development and execution of Change Management plan for Data Discovery, Data Access Request and operationalization of new Data Governance workflows
Skills:
Strong knowledge of Data Governance & Quality - policies, processes and tools
Strong experience & expertise in using Collibra Data Governance tool
Knowledge (experience preferred) using Trillium Data Quality tool and integration with Collibra
Working experience in implementing Data Governance policies and processes
Strong presentation & communication skills
Ability to work with Senior Leaders
Experience working on teams that work under Agile principles
Education & Certifications:
Undergraduate degree in Engineering, Computer Science, Data Management, or similar field of study. Graduate degree preferred.
3+ years of demonstrated Data Governance experience
Minimum of Level 2 Certification in Collibra required
EEO: All Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, colour, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or status as a protected veteran. EOE, including disability/vets.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Technical Data Analyst in Summit, NJ.

Start your career off on the right foot with one of 'America's Top 500 Companies', as awarded by Forbes. Our client is known as a place where people feel included, valued, supported and respected. Innovative thinking and industry-leading technology allow their associates to thrive and grow in their careers. And with a priority placed on their culture and company principles, their commitment to diversity, ethics and the communities in which they operate is their driving force.

REQUIREMENTS:
A BS/BA degree or higher
7+ years of hands-on experience as technical systems analyst planning and conducting functional and data analysis of highly complex business problems to be solved with automated systems
5+ years of experience performing functional and data analysis of financial and regulatory systems
5+ years of experience with documenting complex workflow and data flow diagrams using tools like Visio and PowerPoint
5+ years hands-on experience with gap analysis and data reconciliation using SQL, Excel and other related tools
5+ years hands-on experience with analyzing business requirements and breaking them down into detailed functional and data specifications for developers to implement
5+ years of experience creating/designing data dictionaries and file formats for data consumption
4+ years of Agile experience with advance knowledge of JIRA usage
4+ years of experience with Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) concepts
2+ years of experience implementing GRC solutions using tools like RSA Archer
Knowledge and understanding of business requirements analysis and writing of technical specifications
Experience writing SQL queries and statements to facilitate data and gap analysis
Hands on experience with data design/mapping/modeling experience in working with Centralize Data Lake/s is preferred
Experience with access control lists (ACLs), Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) servers, Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) certificates, Group Policy Objects (GPOs), and Active Directory
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,BA With Data Analyst Skills
Our client, a Bermuda-based public limited liability company, is seeking a BA With Data Analyst Skills

Location: Jersey City, NJ / Raleigh, NC
Position Type: Full Time

Summary:

The business analyst is responsible for gathering requirements, developing workflow and system specifications, and execution of tasks required to deliver IT solutions in support of applications. Must have strong data analyst skills and experience with data mapping

Specific responsibilities include:

-Requirements gathering from the business users and well as developing system specifications for projects, enhancements and bug/issues.
-Work directly with executive level management on the business side to document requirements, review specifications, obtain approval, support UAT and postproduction role out.
-Ability to analyze complex Excel/VBA/Access models and translate into requirements for automated system
-Develop business and technical requirement documents as well as technical specifications.
-Learn new databases and systems to produce specifications needed to create financial and analytical reporting requirements
-Supporting quality assurance and user acceptance testing
-Drive solutions via system modifications and/or workflow to implement new processes (automation, regulatory, etc).
-Customer support and guidance.
-Compiling detailed documentation for technical teams (architect, developers, QA, etc) involved to be clear on the nature and scope of the item being worked on
-Issue resolution/escalation including prioritization and tracking.
-Working with developers to assure specifications are understood and followed.
-Developers included in house development as well as off the shelf software
-Project Management duties.
-Project management of issues through the entire System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) Professional

Qualifications:

-Strong experience in client facing roles with expert skills in requirements gathering with the ability to draw out requirements using a variety of methods to uncover needs that clients would not be able to articulate on their own
-Ability to communicate technically complex IT concepts to business clients
-Must have strong business acumen as well as technical solutions expertise
-5 to 7 years' experience in the SDLC implementing new applications and major enhancements.
-These include underwriting, financial, statistical reporting and claims systems.
-Experience in data integration and data quality projects.
-Ability to work with technical teams (developers, architects, QA, infrastructure), business partners and software vendors to document and implement system modifications on time and within budget.
-Excellent understanding of how technology impacts the business
-Excellent team player with a proven background of individual contribution.
-Excellent interpersonal, documentation, communication, and presentation skills.

Required Technical Skills:

-Strong SQL skills to query SQL databases.
-Understanding of XML language
-Hardware and networking as it relates to system design and implementation

In addition, it would be an asset if your experience included:

-A minimum of 5 years' experience in the insurance industry implement new applications and major system enhancements.
-Excellent knowledge of the P&C business and familiarity with a broad spectrum of Insurance applications.
-Proven experience in developing and managing Underwriting and Claims applications.
-Thorough understanding of underwriting process included the policy lifecycle, coverages, rating, etc,Enterprise Data Governance Project Overview:

The Enterprise Data Governance Project aims to enable COMPANY to manage its "Data-As-An-Asset” and to build the foundation for an enterprise data analytics platform at COMPANY. This program will focus on enabling data stewardship, improving the quality of our data assets, increasing data security and protection, simplifying data integration and establishing better audit trail on data usage at COMPANY.

This program will implement Data Governance & Data Integration tools and processes to provide data owners and data consumers the ability to provision and access high quality, well-governed data for their day-to-day operations. In addition, it will help establish a strong foundation upon which to build a world-class Data Analytics capability that turns data into business insights more efficiently and effectively.

What You Will Be Doing:

1. Execution of the Data Discovery Project Phase 2
o Conduct data discovery stakeholder interviews with business and IT stakeholders (selected applications)
o Identify data sets, develop data flows, understand data-related processes and identify key data issues for each application
o Update of Enterprise Data Flow diagrams and Enterprise Data Catalog inventory
o Creation of Application Playback decks and Data Discovery report & presentation

2. Enablement of Data Roles within COMPANY
o Maintenance of datasets and data roles in the Enterprise Data Catalog - additions, updates and deletions
o Identification of updates / changes to existing data roles for the datasets in the COMPANY Data Catalog
o Perform onboarding, transition and education of COMPANY stakeholders for the Data Roles at the enterprise (Data Owner, Data Steward, Data Custodian)
o Conduct of quarterly Data Owner meetings to communicate upcoming Data Governance initiatives / processes / policies / best practices

3. Lead in onboarding and implementation of Collibra Data Governance tool
o Onboarding of new datasets into Data Governance tool
o Establishment of Data Catalog and shop-for-data feature in Data Governance tool
o Manage metadata ingestion (manual and automated) from different sources
o Creation of new workflows in Collibra Data Governance tool
o New custom workflow for Data Access Request
o New custom workflow for Business Glossary – from proposal to approval
o New custom workflow for asset creation, review and validation
o Training and onboarding of COMPANY stakeholders to Collibra

4. Development of new Data Governance Policies, Procedures and Standards
o Develop and operationalize new Data Access Request process
o Design of new Enterprise Data Request Process, based on ongoing pilot feedback
o Implementation of new Data Request Process - app by app – working with application owners and business stakeholders
o Communication and training of all enterprise users on new Data Request Process
o Development and execution of Change Management plan for Data Discovery, Data Access Request and operationalization of new Data Governance workflows

Skills & Requirements:

Level 2 (5-10 years experience)
• Strong knowledge of Data Governance & Quality - policies, processes and tools
• Strong experience & expertise in using Collibra Data Governance tool
• Knowledge (experience preferred) using Trillium Data Quality tool and integration with Collibra
• Working experience in implementing Data Governance policies and processes
• Experience working on teams that work under Agile principles

Education:

• Undergraduate degree in Engineering, Computer Science, Data Management, or similar field of study. Graduate degree preferred.
• 3+ years of demonstrated Data Governance experience
• Minimum of Level 2 Certification in Collibra required
* * *
Donnelly & Moore is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer

We celebrate and embrace the diverse cultures, perspectives, skills and experiences within our workforce, and strive to empower each individual.

When you are hired by Donnelly & Moore you enjoy these benefits:
A 401K Retirement Savings Plan administered by ADP
Eligibility to Purchase Medical, Dental & Vision insurance through Donnelly & Moore

"DONNELLY & MOORE reserves the right to contract only with direct employers/sponsors of applicants and will not contract with intermediaries of applicants. Donnelly & Moore Corporation may request proof of such direct employment/sponsorship prior to considering any applicant",Hi ,

Please find the full job description below and reply with your updated resume if you are interested…

Position: Informatica IDQ - Data Quality Analyst

Location: New York, NY

Duration: Contract (6-12 Months)

Rate: $Open

Job Description:
Have some experience in Data Quality Analyst
Strong Knowledge in Informatica IDQ
Should have some Informatica Project background
Note: If interested please send your updated resume to naveen.remkumar@two95intl.com and include your salary requirement along with your contact details with a suitable time when we can reach you. If you know of anyone in your sphere of contacts, who would be a perfect match for this job then, we would appreciate if you can forward this posting to them with a copy to us.

We look forward to hearing from you at the earliest!.

Best Wishes,

Naveen Rem Kumar

TWO95 International, Inc

856.528.3312 x1231,DescriptionA large professional services firm in Jersey City, NJ is currently seeking a Human Resources Data Analyst to assist on a long-term project. The Human Resources Data Analyst will be heavily involved with conducting compensation analysis, performance management data analysis, and human capital resource analysis. The Human Resources Data Analyst will be tasked with building reports, tools, and analytics, as well as testing data and reports. The ideal Human Resources Data Analyst must have recent experience working with Power BI, Workday, Excel, and Access.If you are interested in applying for this Human Resources Data Analyst position, please contact Robert Half Management Resources at 201-843-5077 or email your resume to david.serrano@roberthalf.com.RequirementsPower BI, Human Resources Data Analytics, Workday, Excel, Access Robert Half Management Resources matches senior-level financial consultants with a variety of unique interim and long-term project opportunities in areas such as internal auditing, mergers and acquisitions, tax initiatives, and much more. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the legal opportunities that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local office at 888.490.3195 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/management-resources to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. © 2020 Robert Half Management Resources. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use. **Salary:** DOE**Location:** Jersey City, NJ**Date Posted:** July 7, 2020**Employment Type:** Temporary**Job Reference:** 02680-0011451490**Staffing Area:** Interim Project-Based Financial,Job Description Quantitative Data Analyst/Developer - Delta One eTT
Who we are:
We are a fast-paced high-energy small global team that continually leverages a unique mix of quantitative and technology skills to create disruptive electronic trading products to drive business revenues, while efficiently managing operational risk, and ensuring high control standards. Our three core areas are (1) Electronic & Systematic Risk Trading (2) Quantitative Pricing (3) Data.

Electronic & Systematic Risk Trading:
We built the ETF Nitro platform, one of the largest off-exchange cross -product, dynamic auto-hedging and automated risk-trading platforms for ETFs on the street. The platform prices block liquidity, and hedges orders in fractions of a second by tapping into various sources of liquidity. We aim to build, fine-tune, and improve technologies and quantitative strategies to effectively systematically trade risk across different product types.

Quantitative Pricing:
We developed a quantitative pricing platform which systematically prices hundreds of ETFs covering over 20K stocks, 80 currencies and across over 100 exchanges.

Data:
Data sourcing, managing, and analytics are a huge part of what we do. We use different sources of data, in addition to our synthetically derived prices, in doing quantitative analytics with the aim of improving our trading and pricing platform. Data ware-housing, enrichment, consolidation, structuring, and normalization for millions of data points across thousands of ETFs and Indexes are part of our day-to-day function.

Job Details:
You will contribute to developing innovative electronic trading quantitative analytics, technologies and products. As our team is small and very entrepreneurial, we are very results driven and believe every member from the most junior to the most senior brings a unique value and is pivotal to the team's success.

We are looking for someone who is not afraid to challenge the status quo and is open to being challenged with thinking creatively and finding solutions to questions that sometimes have never been asked.

We are looking for someone having the following skills.

" Strong C# .NET Skills
" Good knowledge of Unix, Linux
" Strong programming skills in C# with experience developing highly performant multithreaded applications.
" Good Database skills
" Comfort with basic Math and Statistics
" Experience with Equity and Futures execution venue and some exposure to Market Microstructure
" Some knowledge of Low latency Market Data
" Knowledge of Index & ETF composition data
" Some understanding of Futures, ETFs, Swaps
" Some understanding of Liquidity Transformation
" Theoretical Pricing
" Algorithmic Trading and Hedging Strategies
" Basic knowledge of Financial Modeling and Forecasting
" Working knowledge of Machine Learning algorithms is a nice-to-have
" Working knowledge of Quantitative Back-testing with Matlab, R, or python is useful,Our client, one of the most reputable food manufacturing companies, is seeking a temporary to permanent Data Analyst to work directly with the Warehouse Director and Supply Chain team.

Salary/Hourly Rate:


$25 – 30/hr DOE

Position Overview:


The Data Analyst will be the main point of contact for all tracking, managing, cost maintenance, inventory and deliveries for their 5 domestic distribution centers.

Responsibilities of the Data Analyst:
Maintain communication with couriers for logistics
Track inventory of warehouses
Warehouse KPI consolidation
Creation of IOP & SOP’s
Create reports to track metrics
Create Purchase Orders
Follow up with finance for payments for distribution centers
Qualifications for the Data Analyst:


Must have experience with Excel and SAP
Ability to work independently and good communication skills
Position will require roughly 25% travel down the road
Prior experience with KPI’s and reporting
Education Requirements:


Bachelor’s Degree is preferred
Benefits:


Eligible for Atrium Care Package
The post Data Analyst appeared first on Atrium.,Job Title: Technical Business Analyst with Retail Banking and Large Data Program
Location: NYC, NY
Duration: Full Time
Candidate should have good knowledge in Retail banking concepts with clear understanding of life cycle and terminologies of 2-3 products.
Expert in requirements gathering and drafting BRD, FRD, Test Scenarios / Cases.
He/she should have worked in handling data, preparing reports using Excel or any other data tool.
He/she should be able to handle stakeholder communication in a very clear and precise manner.
He/she should have good knowledge in basicSQL queries and data extraction using SQL.
Candidate should be a team player.,Role Profile: Regulatory Risk Management – Data Analytics and Reporting Analyst Your Role As part of the Equities Americas Regulatory Risk Management team, you will be responsible for design and implementation of a data governance program for Equities transactional lifecycle data. This is an excellent opportunity to build out a framework and governance program within an established team within the Investment Bank. The role will enable you to develop relationships with key members of our product and technology teams, as well as working with the respective control functions in developing a robust and sustainable data governance framework. Your team You'll be working in the Equities Regulatory Risk Management team. We are an Equities Front Office function focused on ensuring necessary processes exist to support compliance with relevant securities laws, rules, regulations, and internal policies. We work with a number of internal areas, including Equities Sales and Trading, COO, Operations, Compliance & Operational Risk Control, and IT. Role description • Engage on the development of a data governance process, procedures and guidelines, ensuring integration with Information Technology processes and policies. This requires coordination and collaboration across Business and Technology stakeholders. • Deliver and maintain requisite documentation conforming to internal standards. • Coordinate with stakeholders on various internal data initiatives, including business change initiatives. • Perform data analysis to measure and enforce high data quality standards. • Collaborate with IT stakeholders to ensure completeness and accuracy of transactional lifecycle data. • Assist in Equities regulatory reporting deliverables including the implementation of the Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT) requirement. Participate in internal and external testing of CAT. • Troubleshoot issues to mitigate and resolve data quality concerns. • Work collaboratively with Information Technology to ensure technology changes do not negatively impact downstream regulatory reporting requirements. • Work with Compliance & Operational Risk in responding to data intensive regulatory inquiries and regulatory examinations. • Work with stakeholders to identify and implement technology solutions in order to enhance surveillance and supervisory capabilities. Your Expertise • Ideal candidate would have a strong propensity for delivering on tight deadlines and be proactive and a self-starter. • 3-5 years experience in a technology or data management role. • Excellent verbal and written communication skills to effectively communicate with both business and technical teams. • Experience working with data mining & analytics technology solutions. • Able to apply a technical understanding to data in order to solve for complex business problems.,Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people s lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment,Job Type: Permanent Full Time

Client Name: Vesta Healthcare/Careguardian, Inc

Job Description:

Position Summary

A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area.

Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people's lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment
Specialty: Clerical
Sub Specialty(s): Business Analyst- Associate
Job Details

Job Start Date: 6/3/2020
Number of Positions: 1
Maximum Submissions Per Job: 3
Shift: M-F 9am to 6pm
State License Details: Not Needed
Bilingual: No
Holiday Coverage Required: No
Minimum Years of Experience: 5

Will facility accept 1099?: No
Incidentals provided by facility: Mileage Reimbursement:,Sr. Data Analyst - RWE If you are a Sr. Data Analyst - RWE with experience, please read on! Top Reasons to Work with Us We are an international healthcare consultancy specializing in end to end evidence development, optimization, and communication. The company's core competencies reside in Meta Research, Modeling, Data Analytics, Scientific Writing and Simulation Risk Analytics. Senior Management has over 50 years of life sciences experience working in pharma, medical device, consulting, and academia. Through our integrated capabilities in data analytics, epidemiology, health economics, market access and medical communications, we provide our clients with a competitive edge in this dynamic market environment. What You Will Be Doing Responsibilities: - Report directory to the group Director, working in teams to conduct real world data analyses for pharmaceutical, medical device and biotechnology clients. - Lead the design and execution of real world data analyses including development of statistical analysis plans (SAP) - Lead more junior analysts in the execution of project work - Synthesize study results and translate into key findings, interpret results in the context of product/market/industry dynamics, and communicate results to clients. - Independently develop high-quality client deliverables in a timely manner - Collaborate with Client Leads and junior analysts, including regular participation in knowledge sharing, training and mentorship activities What You Need for this Position MUST HAVE: - MS or PhD in related field - 3+ years of data analysis experience with Real World Evidence (RWE) data - Advanced programming skills in SAS or R - Experience working with claims, EMR, survey data - Pharmaceutical/Oncology industry experience NICE TO HAVE: - Tableau/Spotfire - Experience developing scientific communications (abstracts, posters) - HEOR data analysis experience What's In It for You - Competitive Salary DOE - 401(k) with match - Performance related bonus - Generous PTO - Comprehensive Benefits package So, if you are a Sr. Data Analyst - RWE with experience, please apply today! - Applicants must be authorized to work in the U.S.
CyberCoders, Inc is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer

All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.

Your Right to Work In compliance with federal law, all persons hired will be required to verify identity and eligibility to work in the United States and to complete the required employment eligibility verification document form upon hire.,Position Summary
A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the New York City area.
Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people s lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment,4+ years of hands on experience in Big dataHadoop ecosystem Expert in high volume data processing (real-time batch), performance optimization. Excellent knowledge of sparkspark streaming Proficient understanding of hadoop ecosystem and related tech stack including spark, HBase, Hive, Sqoop, Flume, Impala, kafka etc. Well versed with big data design patterns Analytical and problem solving skills Hands on experience with Java and SQLs Have experience in working with huge data (?500 TB) Working experience using frameworks like AngularJS, React, JQuery, etc. is beneficial Experience in programmatically interfacing with BI reporting tools, charting libs is a plus Good understanding of JavaJEE along with common frameworks like spring, hibernate, jackson, jersey Nice to have Knowledgeexperience with other big data platforms like redshift, bigquery Experience with platform migration to bigdata Experience with performance testing and tuning No SQL databases like mongodbv. Apache beam,Update 10.18.18 Willing to assist with relocation cost for the right candidate. Open to discuss remote work. Update 8.24.18 - Prefer US Citizen, willing to review Green Card holders. Make sure to interview/evaluate in person. Do not submit unless you have had direct contact with the candidate, this will assist with fake profiles. Relocation at the candidates expense. Subtiers only one level down Original requirements 7.14.18 US Citizen ONLY. No VISA or C2C.

Sr. SDTM Programmer Analyst Must have strong, current SDTM Study Data Tabulation Model (SDTM) development and programming skills. Overall Purpose of the Role/Responsible is for the development of SDTM, SDTM + datasets for clinical study data, but especially development of SDTM mapping specifications, QC of programmed SDTM datasets, and possible actual programming of SDTM datasets for various studies across all therapeutic areas for the client. Collaborate with client and Accenture programming team (offshore) to define timelines, identify and resolve issues. Responsibilities/Authorities Strictly adhere to Accenture Standards (and client’s, as applicable) including Standard Operating Procedures, Guidance Documents, and Policies; Operational and Service level agreements; Metrics and Quality Measures • Accountable for delivery of contracted commitments within budget and accuracy of all project information including, forecasts, costs and timelines for assigned project(s) Act as onsite presence at target account(s) to build and execute client relationships. Expect 80 – 100 % on site time at client site in Woodcliff Lake, NJ Accountable for development and maintenance of cross-functional / cross-department processes related to clinical trials, SDTM, SDTM+, which may include specifications, programming, QC, and deliverables of SDTM related data for analysis and submission. Accountable for execution of cross-functional / cross-department processes related to clinical trials SDTM, SDTM+ development, including specification, programming, QC, and deliverables of SDTM data for analysis and submission Engages appropriate stakeholders in communication to create SDTM standards and process for transition of clinical data to SDTM and SDTM+. Includes Data Transfer Spec review for external data. Involved in extensive clinical team contact (Statisticians, Statistical Programmers, Protocol Data Managers (PDMs), etc. to understand dataset requirements for SDTM, SDTM+ in production. Accountable for SDTM datasets specification, conversion, and delivery to stakeholders, specifically Statistical Programming, but also other users of SDTM datasets such as clinical teams, with high quality and on time deliverables. Provides SDTM data production technology consultation to client Clinical Data Operations team related to SDTM data delivery and manages the activities of a team with a common focus. Basic Qualifications: Minimum 10 years of relevant programming and drug development experience in CRO, Pharmaceutical or Biotech organizations (preferably in Phase I-IV trials). Bachelor’s degree required. Preferred Skill Requirement: Master’s Degree in Computer Science, Mathematics or relevant field preferred Knowledge of Pinnacle 21 and Define.xml creation. Expert in CDISC standards and applicability to clinical database design / capture and reporting Excellent SAS programming skills, (at least 7 years SAS experience) Expert knowledge in clinical trials with 5+ years’ experience working in a clinical project team environment meeting deadlines with quality deliverables Expert in integrating SAS with other leading technologies such as XML, Microsoft Office, etc. to support electronic submissions Expert in addressing & resolving technical challenges that connect SAS, CDISC and XML. Manage risks and escalate appropriately

Additional Job Details: Proven experience in development and implementation of clinical standards in a global pharmaceutical environment. Experience in consulting projects dealing with the assessment, design and/or implementation of CDISC data standards in the clinical data life cycle Professional skill requirements: Excellent written and verbal communication skills Ability to lead and manage functional teams to meet defined goals Experience in working in a global team setting. Ability to work well with team members in other countries (preferably India) Strong work ethic in performing daily activities Ability to constructively manage internal team and client relationships Good time management ability in performing role duties Good problem-solving skills and ability to reach mutually acceptable solutions Act as a team player in client and internal projects / initiatives

Required Skills

Hours: 8:00am to 5:00pm

Location : WOODCLIFF LAKE NJ 07677

Start Date: 12/31/18

Duration: 0-12 month(s)

End Date: 12/30/19

Pay Rate $90.00 (MAX)

If you are interested, please contact us with your most updated resume at 770.702.0134 or reply via this email.

We hope to hear from you soon.

Thank you again for your time and attention!

Have a wonderful day.

Required Experience

Job Location
WOODCLIFF LAKE,,Job Description
Primary Skills: Data, powerBI
Duration: 6 Months (posibility of extention)
Contract Type: W2 Only

Job Opportunity:
This role will report into the Program Portfolio Management Office.
This analyst will be responsible for continuing data integrity of all executive level reporting related to project status, resource assignment, allocations, and forecasting capacity demand risks and issues. They will coordinate closely with management teams to ensure data is maintained accurately.
The Data analyst will be responsible for managing resource capacity demand forecasting, identifying potential risks, exceptions and report creation.
Experience in data analysis, data management, reporting is a must.
Requires high level of skills and experience in Excel, Power BI, and Tableu. Data modeling, dashboard creation and report definitions.
Experience in Clarity / CA PPM beneficial but not required.
Experienced in project management and ability to self define projects and actions that will continue to maintain data integrity within systems.
Training and change management experience, ability to listen and work with senior leaders. Strong communication and documentation skills.
To follow up with any questions, please contact Priyanka at 408-907-2689

Akraya is an award-winning IT staffing firm and the staffing partner of choice for many leading companies across the US. We offer comprehensive benefits including Health Insurance (medical, dental, and vision), Cafeteria Plan (HSA, FSA, and dependent care), 401(k) (enrollment subject to eligibility), and Sick Pay (varies based on city and state laws).

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit at one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,Data EngineerAnalyst Location Salt Lake City, UT (Will prioritize local candidates) Duration 6 month increments Req Notes bull This is a data engineering role that must have AWS experience - aws certs are highly preferable bull Data development with experience in Python (Pyspark, Scikit, Numpy, pandas), Hadoop etc too. Description The Senior Data EngineerAnalyst will work with partners from all business units and other partners to define and detail data reporting requirements for UID initiative. The Analyst evaluates and validates new and existing functions, identifies and analyzes end-user issues and provides support through standardized processes, tools, workflow analysis and testing to ensure end-user requirements are fulfilled. bull 5+ years of associated work experience bull Significant professional experience with SQL, Databases, Data Warehouses BI systems bull Knowledge of big data and analytical technologies bull Knowledge of Cloud Architecture and services bull Detailed analytical abilities bull Written and verbal communication, preferably with technical writing skills The Skills You Bring bull Your advanced working SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases and data warehouses bull Your knowledge of Data Lake and Big Data Architectures bull Your advanced working experience in data analysis, requirement analysis, test case development and technical specifications development bull Your experience with data normalization and denormalization techniques bull Your background building processes supporting data transformation, data structures, metadata, dependency and workload management. bull Your background supporting and working with multi-functional teams in a dynamic environment. bull Your solid data management and interpersonal skills,Job Type: Permanent Full Time

Position Summary

A data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.

Job Responsibilities:
Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
Learn new data related skills and processes
Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
Share and teach skills to others on the data team
Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients
Requirements:
A College degree (required)
5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
Intellectual curiosity around finding the "why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
Passion about our mission to improve people's lives
Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment
Specialty:
Clerical
Sub Specialty(s):
Business Analyst- Associate
Additional Information And Terms
No Additional Info And Terms Available
Job Details

Job Start Date:
6/3/2020
Number of Positions:
1
Maximum Submissions Per Job:
3
Shift:
M-F 8am to 5pm
State License Details:
Not Needed
Bilingual:
No
Holiday Coverage Required:
No
Minimum Years of Experience:
5
Miscellaneous
Will facility accept 1099?:
No
Incidentals provided by facility:
Mileage Reimbursement:
No
Mileage Details:
Bonuses:
No bonuses listed
Expenses:
No expenses listed,Ref ID: 00310-0011482030Classification: Sales Analyst

Compensation: $75000.00 to $90000.00 yearly

My long time farming client has a newly created Data Analyst position to support the sales side of the business. This person will report to the sales manager and be responsible for compiling reports for the sales team and working with the field team to compile projections in a clear and concise matter. Looking for an applicant with experience in data analytics, to assist the sales team with planning based on internal and external data. Essential duties will include review historical data, compile information from the field to create accurate projections, data analytics, retailer data, internal sales data, USDA industry data, compile and maintain reports for the sales team and send daily projections for the following day's plan. A bachelor's of science is required with MBA highly preferred. For additional information please contact Beau Pennington at (559) 439-2815 or beau.pennington@roberthalf.com or on LinkedIn!

Job Requirements:
Data Analytics, Ad Hoc Analysis, Forecasting, Sales Analysis & Reporting, Financial Analysis

Robert Half Finance & Accounting matches skilled finance and accounting professionals in the areas of accounting, bookkeeping, finance, audit, taxation and more on a full-time basis. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the legal opportunities that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local office at 888.490.5461 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/finance to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Finance & Accounting. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,The Business Performance Analyst facilitates process improvement and assists business owners in improving existing process performance through analysis, experience, and employee input in a project environment.The primary responsibilities of the Business Performance Analyst are:

• Assist organization in the creation of reporting and analytics capability to monitor, measure, and assess effectiveness of standardized business processes
• Develop deep understanding of data housed in multiple, disparate systems
Identify patterns in data
Monitor and audit the quality of data
• Designs and creates reports
Prepare and present data in the right form (graphs, charts, or tables) for decision-making and problem-solving process.
Create dashboards, graphs, and visualizations on data.
• Provide support/input to daily, weekly, and/or monthly Key Performance Indicator (KPI) reports and review meetings
• Facilitate and/or participate in cross functional Process Improvement Initiatives and root cause analysis
• Implement strategic quality direction into operational guidelines and practices and support ongoing expansion of the quality culture across the organization
• Provide support to develop support assets, e.g., tracking tool for operational excellence success stories, tracking of root cause/lessons learned from actual delivery experiences, etc.
• Communicate to stakeholders on salient quality issues and business opportunities
• Document key observations and recommendations as appropriate
• Recommend and help implement strategies and actions to mitigate risks/solve issues
• Facilitate project contribution to company's knowledge capital and assets
• Network with external and internal service delivery specialists to share best practices

Qualifications and Education Requirements:

• Associate's degree in Business, Economics, Engineering or 2 years of additional relevant experience, or a bachelor's degree
• Minimum of 2 years' data analyst experience

Preferred Skills:

• Advanced experience in Microsoft PowerPoint and Microsoft Excel (pivot tables, statistical analysis with Excel functions, data mining)
• Experience in Relational Databases and SQL
• Basic quantitative analysis skills
• Basic presentation skills

Job Requirements:,Company Background:

Liberty Source is a business process outsourcing company (BPO). We are the first viable onshore alternative to traditional offshore business process outsourcing. We offer data analytics, finance and accounting, human resources, customer care and specialized industry processes for clients seeking a flexible, cost-effective, and U.S.-based solution, harnessing the talents of military spouses and veterans. Liberty Source is headquartered at historic Fort Monroe, a former military installation in Hampton, Virginia that was designated as a National Monument in 2011.

As part of our company mission to provide opportunities to veterans, reservist and spouses of service members, we encourage these members to apply.

Position Summary:

Liberty Source is seeking a strong Retail Data Quality Analyst with the ability to review, analyze, and quality check data. This position requires an understanding and passion for the consumer retail market and an ability to think strategically, creatively, and precisely regarding the value and legitimacy of large volumes of retail data. This position is based at our main corporate office in Hampton, Virginia.

In this role you will work on the Retail Data Analytics team in support of our client who provides the world’s most successful brands with leading market research, combining consumer and retail point-of-sale data with analytic solutions that interprets today’s market trends while anticipating tomorrow’s trends. If you have a background in retail and/or data quality analysis, then this position may provide you with an enriching career opportunity.

Position Responsibilities (includes but not limited to):
Interpret the usefulness of data, analyzing the content, and presenting data
Conduct detailed quality checks, data validation and build long-term solutions to improve research, processes and data output
Input and update data where necessary to address discrepancies and data inaccuracies
Create data-intensive reports for both internal and external clients' on time and according to standards
Build strong, trusted, ongoing relationships with the appropriate levels with our client as their main point of contact for data integrity
Provide value-added insights to data sets and apply overall industry perspective to specific retail products
Respond to internal and partner inquiries
Make recommendations and suggestions on improvements for efficiencies
Audit / Quality Check data information for content and accuracy
Communicate with clients and internal stakeholders to review, research or source data when necessary
Establish, track and maintain analytics to support data compilation and client reporting
Proactively provide recommendations and analysis regarding assigned industries and retail product categories
Desired Skills and Experience:
Interest or knowledge of the Consumer Retail Industry (apparel, home goods, sports, automotive, e-commerce, food, video games, jewelry and/or similar industries)
Intelligence and Aptitude for understanding and managing large volumes of data
Strong interest in Big Data, Data Analytics or Research
Experience working in a data production environment (deadlines, threshold quotas) preferred
Bachelor's Degree in Accounting, Finance, Economics, Math or related field preferred but not required
1-3 years in quality assurance, quality control, data analysis, market research, retail or equivalent
Strong analytical ability – digests diverse data sets and incorporates them into cohesive and succinct analysis
Detail-oriented and Skilled in the usage of analytical tools and data manipulation
Process-oriented, with focus on effectiveness and efficiency; highly organized; strong attention to detail and thoroughness- must exercise good judgement
Must have clear written and oral communication skills
Dedicated to quality and continuous improvement; willingness to learn new concepts and processes
Strong background in all MS Office products (particularly with Excel, PowerPoint and Word).
Self-starter with high degree of initiative; strong team member and works well independently
Benefits:
Willing to teach and develop candidates who exhibit an ability to learn and grow; this is a great opportunity for a candidate seeking to build a career in data analytics
Strong company culture that promotes work and life balance (samples of our activities include: company cookout, healthy eating programs, community service, etc)
Office located at Historic Fort Monroe and across the street from the beaches at Fort Monroe
Working with a strong team of very talented and educated co-workers
We offer 10 total Paid Company Holidays Annually and the ability to accrue 4 weeks of Paid Time Off Annually beginning on day one.
Medical, dental, vision and life insurance, and other ancillary benefits
A pre-employment background check is required.

To learn more about our business, please visit our website at www.liberty-source.com.,Job Description
We hiring a Data Analyst, for our client, an eCommerce company. The office is located in beautiful Hermosa Beach, California. Walk to the beach on your lunch!

In this role, you will help set the framework for the Digital Marketing and Data Science initiatives. We’re looking for a self-motivated critical thinker who loves the numbers! The ideal candidate will turn data into information, information into insight and insight into business decisions. We want an individual with the highest work ethics, who takes pride in telling stories with data. A team player who is an excellent communicator and quick learner.
This is a high visibility position that reports to the Director of eCommerce and offers a lot of opportunity for a resourceful, motivated individual.

In this role you will:
Provide data-driven recommendations for the marketing strategy by analyzing customer metrics from email, advertising, and sampling initiatives.
Leverage historical data to build out targeted audiences for sampling, mailing, email and advertising campaigns.
Leverage the Marketing CRM to accelerate the business by providing deeper insights into prospect and customer behaviors.
Support customer lifecycle campaigns with data-driven insights for new customer acquisition, retention, and growth.
Increase the marketing team’s use of data and set a high bar for analytics across the department.
Create dashboards and automate reports to support the Marketing team with data-driven decisions.
Assist the marketing team in pulling reports and insights for various marketing campaigns and presentations.
Work closely with the Director of Ecommerce to support all digital marketing efforts.
To succeed in this role you will need:
BS in Mathematics, Economics, Computer Science, Information Management or Statistics
Proven working experience as a data analyst or business data analyst
A proven track record of initiating and delivering actionable analyses/recommendations in order to drive business impact
Some experience building data science models to provide deeper insights
Excellent communication skills (technical and non-technical) and comfort working in a fast-paced environment
Excellent SQL skills, fluency with BI/visualization tools, deep knowledge of Excel.
Additional knowledge in R, Python, programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks) a plus
Technical expertise regarding data models, database design development, data mining, and segmentation techniques
Adept at queries, report writing and presenting findings
Ability to work autonomously
If you are a California resident applying for a job, you consent to our California Job Applicant Privacy Notice. https://hirepeopletree.com/ccpa,Data Analyst Location Burbank, CA Start Date Jul 20, 2020 Apply Now Sign Up For Job Alerts Email Job Refer a Friend Apply with LinkedIn Job Description Data Analyst Burbank, CA Direct Hire Up to 100k year Successful candidate will engage with business teams to define business questions, prepare and model data, and perform analyses with the purpose of understanding or drawing conclusions from the data. This role will join the Analytics Team and will work closely to build, deploy and administer self-service analytics across business units. In this role, you will utilize the Plans diverse analytics tools to turn data into actionable insights with the goal of creating a data-driven culture across the organization. Required Skills Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, or other related field as well as equivalent work experience. Minimum 5 years in a quantitative data analytics role with emphasis on data preparation and analysis. Strong ability to blend and wrangle data, create logical data models to be used as a basis for analysis. Proficiency in using enterprise analytics platforms, data visualization tools Tableau, Alteryx, ThoughtSpot, Business Intelligence solutions or equivalent. Knowledge of relational DBMS, specifically Oracle, and ability to script and execute SQL queries. Understanding of the principles and tools of statistical analysis and machine learning is a plus. Bonus Skills Previous work experience in the HealthCare industry preferred. Be a part of the ConsultNet difference. As a leading national provider of IT staffing and solutions, ConsultNet delivers exceptional services to startup, midmarket and Fortune 1000 companies across North America. Since 1996, we've partnered with clients to create rewarding opportunities for our consultants, successfully building teams that have surefire results. In the past two years alone, we have placed more than 1,500 consultants in contract, contract-to-hire, or direct placement opportunities. We understand communication is key to finding the right job that matches your skills and career goals. For us, it's not just the work that we do it's how we do the work. Our breadth of offerings extends to multiple IT positions in major markets throughout the country, see more at www.consultnet.com Id 20-01031,Title: Data Analyst
Location: Chatsworth, CA
Duration: 12 Months

Responsibilities:
Perform compliance-driven data processing and data analysis
Prepare data reports
Coordinate and communicate with various departments to effectively execute assignments
Perform field verification to ensure data integrity
Support the development of Company projects
Other tasks as assigned
Qualifications
B.S. in Engineering required
1-3 years of experience
Knowledge of spreadsheets and database analysis tools (OSIsoft PI, Excel formulas/macros/programming)
Computer knowledge (Microsoft Office)
Ability to effectively interact with various departments to maintain open lines of communication
Clear and concise verbal and written communication skills to communicate technical and non-technical information and concepts with various levels of management in both formal and informal settings
Engineering/technical principles to analyze and resolve problems,Location: Sunnyvale, CAPosition Overview:

Development and maintenance support for key data infrastructure supporting the Chrome OS client team, specifically the channel/customer sales teams. The Analyst will have very strong SQL skills, strong time management and self-direction, be comfortable cleaning up tech debt and maintaining pipelines, strong attention to detail, and strong documentation skills.

Job Requirements:

Skill/Experience/Education:

Mandatory:
1-3 years developing SQL workflows.
Project management experience.
Must be a strong self-directed contributor.
Skill Matrix:

Skill Name: SQL

Level: 4

Years: 0-3 years

Mandatory: Yes

Description: Must have a high level of comfort writing and maintaining SQL pipelines

As an equal opportunity employer, ICONMA prides itself on creating an employment environment that supports and encourages the abilities of all persons regardless of race, color, gender, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or disability.,Description ***FOR IMMEDIATE CONSIDERATION: email Valerie Nielsen at Valerie.Nielsen@rht.com with your resume titled Data Analyst***The Position: Data Analyst Location: El Segundo, CAPlease note: this is a direct hire (not contract)Target Salary: 70,000Data AnalystYou didn't get to where you are by following an expected path. You follow your instincts, while everyone around you sits back and waits for life to happen. You are a catalyst, an agent of change. You're smart, energetic, and aggressive. You possess an entrepreneurial spirit. You are inquisitive, innovative, and resourceful. You have a fresh perspective. Our client is looking to build out their team from and bring on a Data Analyst!RequirementsTop Requirements:+ Data gathering, formatting and management of databases, including initial creditor matrix, service lists, claims registers, Schedules/SOFA data, voting amount spreadsheets and voting tabulation reports.+ Review, reformat, input and export data for Schedules of Assets and Liabilities and Statement of Financial Affairs.+ Format service lists and merge files for complex variable data mailings.+ Review claims, perform claims reconciliation and prepare and reformat various claims reports for internal and external purposes.+ Coordinate preparation of contract review databases, including delegation of contract review, compilation of completed files and review final work product.+ Advanced working knowledge of and experience with Microsoft Excel and Microsoft Access. Proficiency with other aspects Microsoft Office, especially Outlook and Word. Working knowledge of VBA and SQL preferred.+ Possess advanced technical skills to facilitate creating financial models, databases, pivot tables, analytics, etc.+ Ability to quickly learn and navigate proprietary software. ***FOR IMMEDIATE CONSIDERATION: email Valerie Nielsen at Valerie.Nielsen@rht.com with your resume titled Data Analyst***Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998.Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/technology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.© 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.**Salary:** $60,000.00 - $70,000.00 / Yearly**Location:** El Segundo, CA**Date Posted:** July 9, 2020**Employment Type:** Full-time**Job Reference:** 00320-9502619843**Staffing Area:** Technology u0026 IT,Job Description:
Prepare and maintain existing Investment reports for both internal and external clients
Prepare and review all reports before distributing and follows key controls
Help analyze investment information in the reports
Perform research and answer
Assist with the internal stakeholders to define and complete new report requests
Prepare reporting deadlines on a daily, weekly, monthly and quarterly basis
Prepare the reporting materials, research and resolve issues that may be present
Requirements:
Proficient with the Microsoft Office Suite, including strong Excel skills
Strong analytical, problem-solving and organization skills
Excellent verbal, written and interpersonal communication skills
Able to communicate with professionals at all levels
Able to work independently and take initiative
Able to adapt to changing priorities
Able to work on multiple projects with accuracy and efficiency, while keeping to deadlines
Detail-oriented
A team player
Strong work ethic
Experience:
Bachelor’s degree in finance, accounting, business or related field and a minimum of 3 years' relevant experience
REF # 35576,Ref ID: 00320-9502595975Classification: Data Reporting Analyst

Compensation: $30.00 to $35.00 hourly
Data * SQL * Excel * SSRS * Data Reporting Analyst *
Robert Half Technology is looking for a Data Reporting Analyst to work for their client in Downtown LA that is in the non-profit industry. The Data Reporting Analyst candidate should have at least 1 year of experience in SSRS and 2 years of experience in SQL. The Data Reporting Analyst will be responsible for creating reports in SSRS, running SQL queries, and working with cross-functional teams to review Data Analysis reports. This is a great opportunity for a Data Reporting Analyst to become more advance in SSRS and learn new data Analyst tools.

If you are interested in this opportunity, please email Vice President - Division Director Jimmy Escobar at Jimmy.Escobar@RHT.com or call at (310) 209-6838. https://www.linkedin.com/in/jimmyescobar/

Job Requirements:
Data *Excel - MUST *SQL - MUST *SSRS - highly preferred *Data Reporting Analyst
Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/technology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,Ref ID: 00320-9502603451Classification: Mid-Senior Data Analyst

Compensation: $90000.00 to $110000.00 yearly
**FOR IMMEDIATE CONSIDERATION, please email resumes to Ali Scott at ali.scott@rht.com with the title of Data Analyst***
Functional Role: Data Analyst

Location: South Los Angeles, CA

Benefits: M/D/V

Salary Range: $90,000-110,000 (DOE)

Summary: You didn't get to where you are by following an expected path. You follow your instincts, while everyone around you sits back and waits for life to happen. You are a catalyst, an agent of change. You're smart, energetic, and aggressive. You possess an entrepreneurial spirit. You are inquisitive, innovative, and resourceful. You have a fresh perspective. A large insurance company is looking for a Business System Analyst. If you are looking for incredible stability in our current market this is one of our best clients to join!

Job Requirements:

Top Requirements:

• 4+ years experience as a Data Analyst working with a variety of database systems
• Strong experience with Tableau reporting, SQL databases, and excel
• Ability to work independently, dig through different databases and understand how to align data tables and to consolidate in a normal fashion
• Insurance Industry experience is a strongly preferred
**FOR IMMEDIATE CONSIDERATION, please email resumes to Ali Scott at ali.scott@rht.com with the title of Data Analyst***
Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/technology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,Job Description
Survey Data Analyst
Overview:
You’ll join a small, collaborative group of Product Consumer Insights researchers who work side-by-side with other Researchers, Product Managers, Product Designers, Engineers and Data Scientists to understand consumer behavior, measure brand perceptions and guide product innovations.
Responsibilities:
Point-person and team resident expert on tracking data
Manage large-scale, global survey trackers and analyze data trends across multiple regions
Customer Satisfaction Survey & Cancel Survey
Synthesize secondary, quantitative and behavioral data to tell a compelling story with actionable insights
Survey data manipulation in Excel or SPSS, combining and analyzing survey data with behavioral data
Quant survey questionnaire writing/editing
Developing of sample composition and weighting approach
Creative data visualization while report writing
Develop research reports in Google Slides
Qualifications:

5+ years of work experience as a data analyst or survey researcher with strong skills in survey data analysis and reporting to support global brands
Experience working in a tech or media industry is a plus
Experience working in an a/b testing culture is a plus
A very strong aptitude for data and statistics including fluency in Excel and SPSS/R and ability to confidently converse with our analytics partners
Experience in quant survey design/writing and developing a sample and weighting approach for global research
Comfortable creating tab and banner plans & communicating with data processing
Experience in SQL to link behavioral data with survey data is a plus
Strong data visualization skills in Google Slides or PowerPoint to convey information and results clearly
Knowledge of data visualization and dashboard design in Tableau is a plus
Foundation in basic statistics (e.g., hypothesis testing, correlations, regressions)
Creativity and attention to detail
Highly collaborative and self-directed,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Analyst/Developer in Los Angeles, CA.

Key Tasks:
Interprets data and analyzes results using statistical techniques and provides ongoing reports
Develops and implements data collection systems and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and data quality
Acquires data from primary or secondary data sources and maintains databases/data systems
Identifies, analyzes, and interprets trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filters and cleans data, and reviews computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Works closely with management to prioritize business and information needs
Locates and defines new process improvement opportunities
REQUIREMENTS:
To be considered for this position, candidates must have experience in a similar role, or they must possess significant knowledge, experience, and abilities to successfully perform the responsibilities listed
Relevant education and/or training will be considered a plus
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Enterprise Data Quality Technical Analyst (EDM) - Downtown LA - Full Time, Direct Hire

The Enterprise Data Quality Technical Analyst is a key role responsible for developing and supporting an Enterprise data quality solutions. This role will support the business in the ability to analyze and assess the data quality in the various data environments (Transactional, MDM etc.). This is critical in supporting the Data Governance organization with actionable information to improve the quality and value of information assets. Client is consolidating its data management platform on Informatica including Informatica MDM, Power Center, Data Quality (IDQ), EDC and Axon .

Responsibilities:

Data Quality Development
Responsible for full cycle development (designing, testing, deploying, and documenting the data quality procedures and their outputs).
Document at a functional level how the procedures work within the data quality applications.
Perform data load and mappings from source.
Business and Technical rules Management
Partner with the Data Governance Office and business data stewards to provide summary results of data quality analysis, which will be used to make decisions regarding how to measure business rules and quality of the data.
Translate the business data quality rules into technical rules which are implemented on the platform.
Develop and implement additional data quality monitoring based on requirements gathered from business units.
Data Quality as a Service
Develop and implement additional data quality monitoring based on requirements gathered from business units.
Manage and prioritize a request queue for new data quality monitoring requests over new data elements, new data quality rules, and maintenance to existing rules.
Provide reports to provide insight to data quality errors.
Required:
3-5 years of data analyst experience performing data profiling, data mapping, data validation, data manipulation, data analysis, use case, test cases, etc. preferably in a data-intensive financial company.
3-5 years' experience in defining and deploying data quality programs and tools on enterprise data quality projects
3-5 Years of experience in Data Quality
If interested, please contact Margot Parsons at Mparsons@genuent.com or call 714-465-5478,Job Description
Primary Skills: Data Analysis, Python, Customer Data
Duration: Full time

Job Summary:
Provides expertise in the design and functionality of business applications.
Understands customers' business processes and products and how best they can be supported by the application systems.
Reviews and validates the detailed technical design for business applications provided by the supplier to ensure alignment with business requirements.
Performs quality review checks on project deliverables.
Performs impact analysis of application changes across various components, holding an end-to-end view of the system.
Estimates Rough Order of Magnitude for the level of effort/cost of new application functionality.
Specifies / recommends integration and parallel testing criteria.
Supports the implementation activities, troubleshooting system environmental issues, as required.
Essential Job Functions:
Analyze and interpret Customer insights from multiple data sources using statistical techniques.
Support the deployment and business activation of new Customer data assets to drive operational efficiencies, improve customer experience, and drive growth.
Combine data from structured & unstructured sources to Client and interpret new trends/patterns.
Compare and contrast data across trusted sources to surface potential data quality issues.
Liaise, collaborate, and support cross-functional stakeholders with their customer data needs.
Propose data-driven solutions and strategies to business challenges.
Present information using data visualization techniques.
Support experimentation and deployment of predictive models that leverage customer data. Identify process improvement and efficiency opportunities.
Requirements:
High school diploma or equivalent required. Bachelor's degree preferred or equivalent, relevant experience.
Recent 3-4 years of hands-on experience in a Data Analyst / Data Scientist role.
Recent 3-4 years of hands-on experience performing advanced data analysis using Python.
Technical expertise with data models, database design, data access, data mining, and data segmentation techniques.
Advanced level knowledge and experience using Python in a Hadoop (HBase, Hive) environment.
Advanced level experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets & interpreting results.
Strong analytical skills with the ability to combine, organize, and analyze large amounts of data and to tease-out and disseminate key information with attention to detail and accuracy.
Experience with P&C insurance and/or customer data.
Experience with data mining and/or machine learning (Client).
Experience with SQL, Tableau, Alteryx.
Experience developing Big Data capability job-aids for technical / non-technical end user.
To follow up with any questions, please contact Shabana at 408-907-2246

Akraya is an award-winning IT staffing firm and the staffing partner of choice for many leading companies across the US. We offer comprehensive benefits including Health Insurance (medical, dental, and vision), Cafeteria Plan (HSA, FSA, and dependent care), 401(k) (enrollment subject to eligibility), and Sick Pay (varies based on city and state laws).

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit at one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,Job Description
Ajilon is seeking for Data Entry Analyst ***Must be proficient in Excel***

Responsibilities:
Coordinate, create and provide reports to management while manipulating data using pivot tables and macros
Analyze and input all aspects of account/assets information to ensure conformance with company policies
Responsible for posting confidential information into the database and maintained detailed reports logging all transactions
Requirements:

2 years plus experience i

Microsoft Office Excel, (Macros, pivot table, v-look up) Data Entry, Data Analysis

Apply now!
Company Description
We are Ajilon Professional Staffing and one of our staffing experts will connect with you to try and help you land your next exciting role! For more job opportunities visit www.ajilon.com,KORE1, a nationwide provider of staffing and recruiting solutions, has an immediate opening for a Sr. Business Data Analyst with our client in Santa Monica. This position will be remote until further notice. Primary Responsibilities: -Reporting & Analysis - Enable effective decision making by retrieving and aggregating data from multiple sources, identifying key indicators and actionable insights, and effectively communicating the most important information to drive decisions. Design, develop, and evaluate recurring and ad hoc reporting / dashboards to drive and monitor the business and our products using best practices in data visualization and reporting tools, including Tableau, DataStudio, Power BI or similar. -Process Documentation - Work with various functions and end users to identify, document, and communicate standard business processes. -Project Management - Produce detailed business requirements, coordinate and manage user acceptance test plans, and participate in stakeholder management. -Problem Solving - Demonstrate good judgment in solving problems as well as identifying problems and possible mitigation plans in advance. Strong desire and ability to dive deep into a given problem statement. -Subject Matter Expert - Develop deep knowledge of related sub brands data architecture, system map and relation to product/feature use by customers. Act as a trusted adviser to internal stakeholders by sharing best practices and requirements for optimal use of these systems and data. Required Qualifications: -Bachelor’s degree -5+ years of relevant professional experience as a Business Analyst, Data Analyst, or related role -Expert in SQL -Experience with data visualization and reporting tools like Tableau, DataStudio, PowerBI -Strong business analysis and functional experience, including requirements gathering, creating/deploying solutions to end users, writing user acceptance test scripts and facilitating UAT sessions -Proven ability to manage multiple, competing priorities simultaneously and work well in an ambiguous and dynamic environment. -Ability to use data to develop insights, recommendations, and business cases -Excellent written and oral communication skills, including translating findings into compelling recommendations, polished deliverables, and actionable solutions. -Ability to partner with and communicate across business functions, -Excellent problem-solving skills -Willingness to roll up your sleeves and do whatever is necessary Preferred Qualifications: -Proven ability to communicate with business and technical audiences at all levels, including demonstrated success influencing senior leaders and decision makers -Demonstrated ability to dive deep in understanding our business, projects, and opportunities to improve the outcomes of our largest strategic projects and programs -Experience with open source data scripting languages (Python, R etc.) or statistical/mathematical software (e.g. R, SAS, or Matlab) -Experience with data mining and analytics techniques ABOUT KORE1 Specializing in creative and technical recruiting, KORE1 is committed to supporting top IT and Creative professionals in their career paths. We build deep relationships with leading companies, connecting them to exceptional talent every day. With extensive industry expertise and unmatched opportunities, our goal is to provide a unique experience for our contractors and consultants as they prepare for their next role. We are passionate about matching the right people with the right companies. Kore1 provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability or genetics. In addition to federal law requirements, Kore1 complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation and training. Kore1 expressly prohibits any form of workplace harassment based on race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, genetic information, disability, or veteran status.Improper interference with the ability of Kore1's employees to perform their job duties may result in discipline up to and including discharge.,"This role is currently work-from-home and will move to the office environment after the COVID-19 restrictions are lifted.”
12 Month Contract

Experience:
• Strong technical background to run SQL and XLS reports
• Fast learner, Accurate and strong attention to detail
• Excellent analytical and organization skills
• Demonstrated ability to work independently and as part of a team
• Ability to handle multiple project deliverables in a fast-paced environment
• Excellent verbal and written communication skills
• A drive for accuracy with an Agile and end-to-end continuous process improvement approach
• A Plus: Experience in Banking and Finance preferred

Projects to include:
• Running SQL and XLS reporting and metrics on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis
• Updating reporting with new data feeds and/or edits to structure of reports,Sr. Data Analyst Location Burbank, CA Start Date Jul 20, 2020 Apply Now Sign Up For Job Alerts Email Job Refer a Friend Apply with LinkedIn Job Description Sr. Data Analyst Burbank, CA Direct Hire Compensation DOE Successful candidate will work closely with both technical and non-technical stake-holders to build, deploy and administer self-service analytics capability across the organization. In this role, you will utilize the Plans diverse analytics tools to generate meaningful insights and carry out data literacy initiatives with the goal of creating a data-driven culture across the organization. You will support organizational strategic objectives by assessing reporting and analytics asks from business partners, contribute to task backlog, building and delivering data products and self-service capability for the end users within the Plans. You will spearhead trainings to socialize curated data and self-service capabilities while continuously analyzing gaps between new business asks and available curated data worksheet. Required Skills Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, or other related field as well as equivalent work experience Minimum8years of either business intelligence,data engineering, data modeling or information architectureexperience with a focus on enabling self-service analysis Minimum 8 years in a quantitative data analytics role with emphasis on data preparation and analysis Relevant experience designing and implementing business intelligence, data warehouse, owning data models and end-user handover processes Experience designing conceptual, logical and physical data modelsand maintaining data dictionaryand capturing metadata Experience creatingand maintainingautomated data pipelines, data standards,and best practices to maintainintegrity and security of the data ensure adherence to developed standards Experience in developing and maintaining source to target mapping thatincludes extract requirements,derived field logic, domain values and data lineage Experience working in an Agile environment will also help you as you manage multiple projects in a fast-moving environment Preferred Skills Previous work experience in theHealthcare industrypreferred Experience building data models for analytics and reporting projects Previous work experience with agile framework preferred Id 20-01032,Genuent is hiring a Data Quality Control Analystfor our direct client in Glendale, CA. Qualified candidates should send their resume (Word format) to Mark Ahrenholtz at MAhrenholtz@genuent.com.

Data Quality Control Analyst
Long Term Contract

This individual will be working in the Investment Services Field Operations Support unit. Will need to be trained in detailed indexing of incoming documentation packages and some Quality Control Checks of brokerage applications as well. Additional assistance will be asked for to support audit documentation requests and perform other FOS unit duties as needed. Must be detailed oriented and willing to learn our specialized system to perform these duties.

Experience/Responsibilities:
Quality review incoming paperwork
Send communications for document errors
Computer savvy
Quick learner
2 years previous processing experience preferred but not necessarily in the banking/finance industry
Extensive work experience not required but 2 years of processing would be preferred
Recent graduate of 2 or 4 year program with lesser experience acceptable
Responsibilities Continued:
May be required to perform a variety of customer service and/or office support functions in a high-volume environment for both internal and external customers.
Familiar with a variety of the field's concepts, practices, and procedures.
Relies on experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals.
Works under general supervision.
Should have the ability to learn new software systems that are specific to the business unit data entry requirements.
Typically reports to a supervisor or manager.
Requires a high school diploma or its equivalent with 0-2 years of experience in the field or in a related area preferred.,Why is This a Great Opportunity?

Voted a “Best Places to Work” - LABJ and “100 Best Companies to Work For, and Best Benefits & Perks”- Built in LA, the company's culture is driven by self-starters, team players, and visionaries.

Job Description

Are you an ambitious go-getter, passionate about data analytics?

Want to join an award winning company culture with solid products and distinguished clients?

Does problem-solving in a dynamic, fast-paced environment get you fired up?

Do data inaccuracies keep you up at night?

If you answered, “Yes,” to all of the above, then our client wants to hear from you.

As a Digital Marketing Analyst, you will dive deep into big data to extract, analyze, and report on findings that drive growth for the company and their clients.

You will monitor and optimize sales performance on Facebook and across other Paid Social channels, identify opportunities and risks for growth, and present and execute on recommendations for improving the overall health of their retail performance marketing network.

Required Qualifications

?2-3+ yrs experience in a data analytical role; 1-2+ yrs experience managing Paid Social marketing campaigns

?BS / BA Degree in business, economics, mathematics, computer science, or statistics preferred

?Ability to transform complex facts and figures into plain English that can be easily understood

?Keen attention to detail, financial responsibility, and strong organizational skills

?Adept at compiling accurate reports and presenting analytical findings in a clear, concise manner

?Excellent communication skills

?Strong working knowledge of Excel and capacity to work with technical systems and teams

?Adaptable and resourceful self-starter with the inquisitiveness and hunger for optimization and problem-solving

?Knowledge of SQL, Perl, Python a plus,Music Copyright Data Analyst position available within a music licensing company in the SFV area. Company offers great employee benefits and also room for growth!

The candidate MUST have a degree in MUSIC BUSINESS. Music publishing and licensing internship is a plus.,Join a Growing Music licensing company in Woodland Hills!Looking for entry level candidates with Music Business Degree. Company offers full benefits. Internship experience is a plus.

Feel Free to Contact Priscilla in the AppleOne Woodland Hills Office,Job Description
We are seeking a Data Analyst *Temp-Hire* to become an integral part of our team! You will analyze data to understand business and market trends in order to increase company revenue and efficiency.

Responsibilities:
Use data to understand business patterns and trends
Analyze internal and external data through quantitative research
Communicate findings to company through standard and ad hoc reports
Promote best practices in data analysis and reporting
Collaborate with cross-functional teams
Qualifications:
Advanced Excel Skills
Previous experience in business intelligence, analysis, or other related field
Knowledge of statistical tools and business reporting
Strong problem solving and critical thinking skills
Strong attention to detail
Ability to prioritize and multitask,Services is seeking a Jr. Data Analyst for a global chemical and ingredients distributor and provider of value-added services in Downers Grove, IL (also Chicago option).

Job Title: Data Analyst
Location: Downers Grove OR 71st Street Chicago (remote after training due to COVID)
Job Type: Temp, potential Temp-To-Hire
Length: 6-Months
Est. Start Date: ASAP
Hours: 40 hours/week, 8 hours/day
Pay Rate: $22.95-25.00/hour on a W2

Job Description:

This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data. They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager. There are over 50,000 cells each report. This individual will also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.
Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures.

The ideal candidate will have a Degree and a minimum of 1-2 years of professional experience. This role requires an Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level) who is able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros. SQL is a plus but not required for this role. Strong analytical and organizational skills.

MUST appear onsite for the first duration of their training and then will discuss remote work once they get started due to COVID-19.

Important information: This position is recruited for by a remote Kelly office, not your local Kelly branch. If you are interested in this position, please email a word copy of your resume to MegP534@kellyservices.com

Why Kelly®?


As a worker today, its up to you to take charge of your career and look for opportunities to learn, grow, and achieve your potential. Helping you find whats next is what were all about. We know whats going on in the evolving world of workjust ask the nearly 500,000 people we employ each year. Connecting with us means getting the support, guidance, and opportunities needed to take your career where you may have never imagined.

About Kelly®


At Kelly, were always thinking about whats next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, were a leading advocate for temporary/nontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world.

Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.
#KellyGTS

]],Kelly Services is seeking a Provider Analytics Data Analyst for a leading hospital and health care company.

Job Title: Provider Analytics Data Analyst

Location: Chicago, IL

Type: Contract (W2)
Length: 7 months

Pay Rate: $43/HR

Immediate start!!

• This role requires a unique blend of deep technical ability with regards to database skills, ETL systems and excellent visualization skills especially in Tableau, coupled with end customer white glove treatment.
• Co-creation, definition & delivery of major strategic projects will be the norm.
• The role requires a highly resourceful individual with strong customer presence, self-motivation, and strong technical skills.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
• Develop complex SQL Queries
• Design and delivery of large-scale, high-performance data transformation and storage systems such as ETL using SSIS
• Design and delivery of Analytics. Extract, transform and load with Teradata fastload
• Work heavily with Tableau and other visualization tools
• Develop technical requirements based on business requirements
• Define and manage the full development lifecycle to meet client needs
• Willing to translate business requirements into technical architectures

Minimum Skills and Competencies:
• Bachelor Degree.
• 4+ years of demonstrated advance proficiency in SQL development methodologies, R and Python
• Strong background in Relational Databases (Teradata, Microsoft SQL, Oracle) and strong ETL (Microsoft SSIS) experience
• Experienced with automation in Python and/or R
• Must possess effective verbal and written communication skills
• Excellent consulting skills and the ability to work effectively with clients and team members
• Ability to translate business requirements into technical solutions
• Proficient in Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint)
• 4-6 year experience using Tableau
• 4-6 year experience using SSIS

• 3 years experience in health care data statistical analysis

Desired Skills:
• MBA, Master Data Management (MDM), MS in Computer Science or Information Systems, or other advanced technical degree
• Extensive knowledge in Tableau and ETL in SSIS
• Extensive knowledge in Tableau, R, Python and ETL in SSIS and other analytical tools
• Health Insurance industry experience
• Experience with project management

If this position is of interest to you please share your updated word profile at shai879@kellyservices.com and advise the best time and number at which you can be reached.

Shazneen Irani
Professional Technical Recruiter
Kelly Services, Inc.
shai879@kellyservices.com
kellyservices.com

Why Kelly®?


As a worker today, its up to you to take charge of your career and look for opportunities to learn, grow, and achieve your potential. Helping you find whats next is what were all about. We know whats going on in the evolving world of workjust ask the nearly 500,000 people we employ each year. Connecting with us means getting the support, guidance, and opportunities needed to take your career where you may have never imagined.

About Kelly®


At Kelly, were always thinking about whats next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, were a leading advocate for temporary/nontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world.

Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.
#KellyGTS

]],Role: Product Data Analyst
Location: Chicago, IL (Remote to start)
Type: 6-Month Contract-to-Hire
Start: ASAP
*Sorry, no 3rd Party Vendors/No C2C/No Sponsorship**
Summary:
The Product Analyst role will function as a key contributor in the Product organization and will be responsible for supporting multiple cross functional Agile teams through Product functions that span the spectrum from ideation-strategizing to execution-delivery and everything in between. This Analyst will be responsible for diving into various data sources, including web and app clickstream data and transaction-level raw data to uncover opportunities that will enhance the customer experience on the digital properties. This Analyst will also be responsible for assisting in the creation and analysis of a/b tests and for measuring the impact and performance of new Product initiatives.

Essential Functions:
Synthesize data from our web analytics tools and data-lake into actionable insights about our audience and shopper behavior. Clearly communicate these recommendations to internal stakeholders and senior leadership.
Determine the relevant data sources applicable to the business question and diligently verify the data quality and accuracy of the results.
Partner with Product teams to determine project KPIs to collect and measure success and develop a testing plan to effectively measure new initiatives.
Work with developers and technical analysts provide tracking requirements and QA tracking implementation.
Create intuitive, interactive dashboards to enable the team and business with critical metrics, with a focus on data automation, anomaly detection, and baseline engagement areas.
Champion the needs of the customer and business goals throughout the execution of a project.
Must organize with independence, develop a strong understanding of our customers, manage multiple concurrent projects, and identify and lead data solutions.
Partner with IT on tracking, testing & implementation plans.
Proactively identify data issues and work with internal partners to understand options and execute solutions.
Develop metrics to measure success of program features, analyze results, and partner across the organization to develop action plans and enhancement recommendations.
Qualifications:
Bachelor's Degree
Direct experience in a digital environment in a relevant capacity
2+ years overall relevant experience
1+ years digital analytics experience
Strong analytical, prioritizing, interpersonal, problem-solving, presentation, & planning skills
Strong verbal and written communication skills
Demonstrated collaborative skills and ability to work well within a team
Ability to manage multiple projects in various phases of ideation, execution, or delivery
Ability to work with and influence peers and senior management
Ability to work in a fast-paced and deadline-oriented environment
Self-motivated with critical attention to detail, deadlines and reporting
Experience with agile development
Data driven mindset and track record
Skills:
Digital analytics tools such as Google Analytics (preferred) or Adobe Analytics.
Data visualization skills such as Google Data Studio (preferred), Power BI, or Tableau
A/B testing tools and concepts such as Optimizely or Adobe Target
Abilities:
Can organize and analyze large, varied sets of data and distill into actionable insights
Eagerness to learn and a thirst for discovery and answers
Active listener with the ability to ask the right questions to understand the business problem and identity the analysis approach
A team player with a positive attitude and enthusiasm for our team's mission
Education:
Bachelor's degree,Job Description
Title: Data Analyst I

Location: Option to work on-site in Downers Grove, IL or Chicago, IL

Description: Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures. Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential. 0 - 2 years experience

Notes From the Manager:

-Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level) -Low level Data Analyst, no SQL required -Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros

This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data. They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to Univar's internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager. This report has over 50,000 cells each report. The hiring manager will need this individual to also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.
Company Description
Swoon connects with job candidates one-on-one to learn exactly who they are and understand which of our Fortune 1000 clients would have their dream jobs. We form relationships, not just connections, and we pride ourselves on our contractor care initiatives.

Our accomplishments continue to increase each year, and we have received some of the highest honors in the industry. We were named a “Best Staffing Firm to Temp For” by Staffing Industry Analysts in 2019, 2018, 2017, 2015 and 2014.,Job Description
Possible Contract to Hire!

Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures. Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential. 0 - 2 years experience

Low level Data Analyst, no SQL required -Possible contract to hire, no guarantees -Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros

This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data. They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to the client's internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager. This report has over 50,000 cells each report. The hiring manager will need this individual to also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.

SECOND OPTIONAL LOCATION YOU CAN WORK IS: 7050 W 71st St, Chicago, IL 60638
Company Description
Swoon connects with job candidates one-on-one to learn exactly who they are and understand which of our Fortune 1000 clients would have their dream jobs. We form relationships, not just connections, and we pride ourselves on our contractor care initiatives.

Our accomplishments continue to increase each year, and we have received some of the highest honors in the industry. We were named a “Best Staffing Firm to Temp For” by Staffing Industry Analysts in 2019, 2018, 2017, 2015 and 2014.,Job Description
Data Analyst

Duration: 6+ month contract

Location: Chicago, IL

***MUST HAVE STRONG TABLEAU AND SQL SKILLS***

Duties and Responsibilities:
Creates specifications for reports and analysis based on business needs and required or available data elements.
May provide consultation to users and lead cross-functional teams to address business issues.
Produces datasets and reports for analysis using system reporting tools.
May perform research and assists in analyzing financial and health data, including medical algorithms to determine health care expenditures, medical and economic outcomes, and cost containment strategies.
Analyzes complex business problems and issues using data from internal and external sources to provide insight to decision-makers.
Identifies and interprets trends and patterns in datasets to locate influences.
Qualifications:
Bachelor’s Degree and 5 years’ experience in health care data statistical analysis OR 7 years’ experience in healthcare data statistical analysis.
3 years’ experience in data analysis and information reporting relating to healthcare data
Ability to query and analyze large sets of complex healthcare data and 4 years’ experience using Structured Query Language (SQL)
Ability to derive insights from complex data for presentation and decision making
Experience with data visualization tools Tableau, MicroStategy or similar
Verify accuracy of reports and provide insights.
Demonstrated best practices and knowledge of internal or external business issues to improve products or services
Ability to independently solve complex problems
Ability to work independently with minimal guidance
Ability to serve as a resource for colleagues with less experience; may direct the work of other staff members.
Experience with visualization tool Tableau or similar highly preferred
Experience authoring/maintaining SAS for complex reporting purposes
Experience or exposure to clinical data integration
Ability to provide subject matter expertise on healthcare/insurance industry
Expertise in business analysis process flows, facilitation, requirements gathering, testing software systems, etc.
Proficient creating and leveraging complex pivot tables
Financial analysis related to provider and facility data

Company Description
Founded in 1994 as Computer Resource Solutions, The CRS Group is a privately held company with offices in Itasca, IL and downtown Chicago. CRSG provides staffing solutions to Fortune 500 companies by successfully managing their IT contingent workforce needs. We expanded our offerings to extend that same high-quality service to other business needs, including creative, marketing, finance, legal and HR.,Great Excel knowledgePerforms data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures. Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential. 0 - 2 years experience


-Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level)
-Low level Data Analyst, no SQL required
-Possible contract to hire, no guarantees
-Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros

This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data. They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager. This report has over 50,000 cells each report. The hiring manager will need this individual to also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.,Collaborate with the Data Governance capabilities and roadmaps, standards and processes. Track the improvement and adoption.* Provide leadership and mentoring to both accounts and service lines by providing coaching, training, and awareness of data governance and data quality policies.
Adhere to processes by which proper data governance approval is obtained for information exchange between services lines, accounts and regions.
Provide input to existing and new data standards
Develop and document process documentation regarding account data quality auditing
Manage data related tasks to support accounts in data clean up and standardization activities.
Update/modify project plans, provide status reports, and track tasks to completion to meet timeline deliverables for internal projects
Ensure that key business terms and metrics are inventoried and maintained centrally for timely access electronically
Apply project management skills to manage multiple tracks of data governance activities based on an overall project plan.
Support account data stewardship program. Provide guidance and fulfill requests from data owners, data stewards and other stakeholders.
Perform additional job duties and support special projects as assigned
Required
Must handle multiple tasks, manage time effectively, and establish priorities to meet deadlines in a fast-paced and changing team environment
Excellent oral, written, and presentation communication skills. Strong negotiation and group facilitation skills; ability to move a process forward, while meeting the needs of a variety of internal customers.
Relationship management skills that include: (1) excellent listening and consultative capability, (2) the ability to influence and negotiate with business and technology partners to drive change and resolve conflicts at the lowest level and (3) the ability to take a broad perspective and make key connections
Build trust with large project teams through effective communication, conflict management and professional rapport
Superior project management/consulting and leadership skills. Demonstrated ability to facilitate complex, mission critical projects and to develop, participate in and guide multi-disciplinary work teams. Manage task time lines and deliverable schedules and share concerns about deliverables, time lines, and issues with Data Governance, PMOs, account leadership, and partners.
Strong attention to detail when dealing with data and multiple work streams
Excellent time management skills
Comfortable working remote and being conscience of carefully communicating via email, instant messaging, and webex meetings.
Sound judgment, initiative, resourcefulness, tenacity and the flexibility to operate independently in a fast-paced environment.
Knowledge of Data Governance, Data Quality and Data Management projects.
Ability to quickly develop an understanding of business processes and how data is used.
Experience in dealing with internal and external customers. Must be able to deal with strong personalities and people who have competing priorities. Needs to be resilient; resolving conflicts quickly to achieve desired business results.
High level of energy and enthusiasm
Experience in remediating data issues is recommended.
Customer focused; ability to interpret customer requirements
Expert level skills in Microsoft Suite including Excel, Word, Powerpoint, Access, and Visio
4+ years data related experience
Bachelor's degree or 4 years of related industry experience required
About TEKsystems:

We're partners in transformation. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia. As an industry leader in Full-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change. That's the power of true partnership. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company.

The company is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.

If you would like to request a reasonable accommodation, such as the modification or adjustment of the job application process or interviewing process due to a disability, please call 888 472-3411 or email accommodation@teksystems .com for other accommodation options.

Job Requirements:,Job Description
We are seeking a Data Analyst to become an integral part of our enterprise fortune 500 team! You will perform data collection, analysis, validation and reporting. Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures. Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential. 0 - 2 years experience

Responsibilities:
Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level
Low level Data Analyst, no SQL required
Possible contract to hire, no guarantees
Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros
This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data.
They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to Univar's internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager.
This report has over 50,000 cells each report.
The hiring manager will need this individual to also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.
SQL is not required and this is a relatively low level Data Analyst role
First day start details:
They must appear onsite for the first duration of their training and then will discuss remote work once they get started due to COVID-19.

Company Description
SkySource Solutions believes in attaining success. We know success is important to our clients, applicants, candidates, and our internal staff and want to be an integral part of that process.

The SkySource Difference: We are not just another staffing firm! We truly care about our candidates long-term success and how we get there together. So the BIG Question is... How do we get there?
Our team of Recruiters come with 5 plus years of industry experience and are not looking to just find you a job. We truly care about your short-term and long-term career goals and understand what's important in making that next career move. We want to understand what you are looking for from a cultural, compensation and benefits perspective.

Apply today and experience the SkySource difference!,Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Downers Grove, IL+ salary:$20 - $22 per hour+ date posted:Friday, July 10, 2020+ experience:1 Years+ job type:Contract+ industry:Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services+ reference:489222+ questions:312-917-1515.**job description**Data Analystjob summary:Our client, a global distributor in Lisle, IL is looking for a junior level Data Analyst to join their team!If you are interested, please send resumes to **Stacey Yuan** at **stacey.yuan@randstadusa.com**location: Downers Grove, Illinoisjob type: Contractsalary: $20 - 22 per hourwork hours: 9 to 5education: Bachelor's degreeexperience: 1 Yearsresponsibilities:Responsibilities include:+ Performing data collection, analysis, validation and reporting.+ Designing tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures.+ Organizing, comparing, analyzing data from 3rd party and then compare report to internal reports to see where the data differs and understand why it differs.This report has over 50,000 cells each report.+ Adding data, uploading, editing, and changing data for errors and inconsistencies.qualifications:Requirements include:+ Bachelors, business related+ 1-2 years experience with data analysis+ Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level)+ SQL highly preferred+ Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, microsskills: Business AnalysisEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Job Description
Provider Analytics Data Analyst
Duration: 6+ month contract
Location: Chicago, IL 60601
Overview: The CRS Group is currently looking for a Provider Analytics Data Analyst one of our clients in the Chicagoland area. The CRS Group is a nationwide Staffing Firm who works primarily with Fortune 500 and Fortune 1000 corporations.

Duties and Responsibilities:
This role requires a unique blend of deep technical ability with regards to database skills, ETL systems and excellent visualization skills especially in Tableau, coupled with end customer white glove treatment.
Co-creation, definition & delivery of major strategic projects will be the norm.
The role requires a highly resourceful individual with strong customer presence, self-motivation, and strong technical skills.
Develop complex SQL Queries
Design and delivery of large-scale, high-performance data transformation and storage systems such as ETL using SSIS
Design and delivery of Analytics. Extract, transform and load with Teradata fastload
Work heavily with Tableau and other visualization tools
Develop technical requirements based on business requirements
Define and manage the full development lifecycle to meet client needs
Willing to translate business requirements into technical architectures
Qualifications:
Bachelor Degree.
4+ years of demonstrated advance proficiency in SQL development methodologies, R and Python
Strong background in Relational Databases (Teradata, Microsoft SQL, Oracle) and strong ETL (Microsoft SSIS) experience
Experienced with automation in Python and/or R
Must possess effective verbal and written communication skills
Excellent consulting skills and the ability to work effectively with clients and team members
Ability to translate business requirements into technical solutions
Proficient in Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint)
4-6 year experience using Tableau
4-6 year experience using SSIS
MBA, Master Data Management (MDM), MS in Computer Science or Information Systems, or other advanced technical degree preferred
Extensive knowledge in Tableau and ETL in SSIS
Extensive knowledge in Tableau, R, Python and ETL in SSIS and other analytical tools
Health Insurance industry experience
Experience with project management
crs_mpriebe
ss # 87037
Qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, or genetic information.,Responsibilities:* Collaborate with Data Governance capabilities and roadmaps, standards and processes. Track the improvement and adoption.
Provide leadership and mentoring to both accounts and service lines by providing coaching, training, and awareness of data governance and data quality policies.
Adhere to processes by which proper data governance approval is obtained for information exchange between services lines, accounts and regions.
Provide input to existing and new data standards
Develop and document process documentation regarding account data quality auditing
Manage data related tasks to support accounts in data clean up and standardization activities.
Update/modify project plans, provide status reports, and track tasks to completion to meet time line deliverables for internal projects
Ensure that key business terms and metrics are inventoried and maintained centrally for timely access electronically
Apply project management skills to manage multiple tracks of data governance activities based on an overall project plan.
Support account data stewardship program. Provide guidance and fulfill requests from data owners, data stewards and other stakeholders.
Perform additional job duties and support special projects as assigned
Required
Must handle multiple tasks, manage time effectively, and establish priorities to meet deadlines in a fast-paced and changing team environment
Excellent oral, written, and presentation communication skills. Strong negotiation and group facilitation skills; ability to move a process forward, while meeting the needs of a variety of internal customers.
Relationship management skills that include: (1) excellent listening and consultative capability, (2) the ability to influence and negotiate with business and technology partners to drive change and resolve conflicts at the lowest level and (3) the ability to take a broad perspective and make key connections
Build trust with large project teams through effective communication, conflict management and professional rapport
Superior project management/consulting and leadership skills. Demonstrated ability to facilitate complex, mission critical projects and to develop, participate in and guide multi-disciplinary work teams. Manage task time lines and deliverable schedules and share concerns about deliverables, time lines, and issues with Data Governance, PMOs, account leadership, and partners.
Strong attention to detail when dealing with data and multiple work streams
Excellent time management skills
Comfortable working remote and being conscience of carefully communicating via email, instant messaging, and webex meetings.
Sound judgment, initiative, resourcefulness, tenacity and the flexibility to operate independently in a fast-paced environment.
Knowledge of Data Governance, Data Quality and Data Management projects.
Ability to quickly develop an understanding of business processes and how data is used.
Experience in dealing with internal and external customers. Must be able to deal with strong personalities and people who have competing priorities.
High level of energy and enthusiasm
Experience in remediating data issues is recommended.
Customer focused; ability to interpret customer requirements
Expert level skills in Microsoft Suite including Excel, Word, Powerpoint, Access, and Visio
4+ years data related experience
Bachelor's degree or 4 years of related industry experience required
About TEKsystems:

We're partners in transformation. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia. As an industry leader in Full-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change. That's the power of true partnership. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company.

The company is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.

If you would like to request a reasonable accommodation, such as the modification or adjustment of the job application process or interviewing process due to a disability, please call 888 472-3411 or email accommodation@teksystems .com for other accommodation options.

Job Requirements:,This position is responsible for working on multiple project tasks in support of the technical requirements and analysis to develop and validate a solution design in the data, information and ETL domains in support of an end-to-end analysis development, management, and delivery; intensive data analysis from a documentation, investigation and technical profiling (queries) perspective; interfacing between various business and technical teams to compile requirements and design solutions; providing technical leadership to the team; work closely with customers to build relationships; and continuously gaining a deeper understanding of relevant data and processes to build analytic solutions to meet business needs. Responsible for gathering and assessing business information needs and preparing system and data requirements. Performs analyses and profiling of the data, create detailed mapping documentation including transformation rules. Requirements: Has an understanding of healthcare / payor data, subject areas, and source systems. Must understand data, data relationships at the table and attribute level. Able to interpret measurement definitions, and perform data decomposition. Perform Gap analysis and impact analysis on any changes that are being suggested. Possesses working knowledge of Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS) and data warehouse, including full reference architecture from data integration, through semantic layer and reporting. Strong knowledge of data and dimensional modeling. Experienced in group facilitation with participants from diverse business functions and work skills Qualifications: -3 plus years of experience with Online Transactional Processing (OLTP), data warehouse and dimensional modeling -3 plus years of experience with data modeling experience (conceptual, logical and physical) using a data modeling case tool -3 plus years of professional experience working in IT -Experience with canonical and industry models -Experience with Teradata or Oracle warehousing -Experience with Data Warehouse Measure calculation frameworks -Experience with ERWin -Experience with DB2 -Healthcare experience is a plus,Show expertise in data quality assurance

Establish data quality reporting procedures and analyze data quality reports Identify potential irregularities across several internal/external data sources

Investigate data variances at their root source and resolve issues as appropriate

Liaise between management, technical staff and subject matter advisors Understand business matters, troubleshoot problems and develop responses

Establish & manage a database focused risk prototype customization platform,Major Duties

Support data analytics needs of Data Steward

Contribute to the development, execution and/or monitoring of data quality rules

Develop dashboard and create ad-hoc reporting as needed using self-service tools like Power BI

Ensure issues are identified, tracked, reported on and resolved in a timely manner

Identify opportunities to enhance processes regarding data flow and data quality to improve accuracy, viability and value

Participate in special projects as needed and perform other duties as assigned

Knowledge/Skills

Hands on coding experience with enterprise data governance tools such as IBM InfoSphere Information Analyzer

Strong database systems development competence and data architecture/modeling skills

Strong data analysis and reporting skills

Strong analytical and problem solving skills

Expertise in PL/SQL and SAS programming

Strong communication skills

Knowledge of a wide variety of data management and analytical platforms and tools.

Experience Required

Bachelor's Degree in Management Information Systems, Computer Science or a related field and/or equivalent work experience,Title: Sr. Data Analyst
Location: Chicago, IL
Duration: Direct Hire
Rate: DOE

**can not work C2C / can not provide sponsorship**
Must haves:
- Comfortable analysing data
- Experience creating and analyzing Tableau dashboards
- Extensive experience with SQL and is able to to setup complex searches
- Ability to profile data, finding correlations and patterns within data
- Strong communication skills. This person will be collaborating with the business team and client
- Insurance reporting experience is a plus
- 5-10+ years of experience,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client that is seeking a Data Analyst in Evanston, IL.

Job Summary:
This position is responsible for assisting the Project Administrator in running data load processes and Quality Control processes. Responsibilities include running data comparison reports as required.

Essential Duties:
Develop a proficient understanding of the Accuity database and the underlying data interactions as related to how the payments products are used
Assist with the preparation of reports to support the data collection effort
Assist with processing third-party data loads
Assist in running international data QC (e.g. setting up and running QC queries)
Assist with technical / data-related tasks of the department
Provide back-up for critical department tasks
Other projects as needed
REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree or equivalent required
Organized and detail-oriented with strong analytical skills
Excellent oral and written communication skills
Able to independently make decisions, solve problems and handle multiple tasks
Ability to work under pressure and meet deadlines; ability to work overtime
Self-motivated, reliable, and proficient at working independently as well as in a team
Proactive approach in research of various secondary sources
Higher knowledge of relational databases (MS Access); ability to alter, create, and run queries and macros
Technical knowledge of SQL scripting and Java a plus
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Icon has an immediate need for a Data Analyst for a 9+ month contract in Northbrook, IL (60062). This position offers the possibility of extension and/or conversion to full-time employment, and pays up to $75/hour depending on experience.Overview:
Provides expertise in the querying of each database used by RWE Analytics team as part of the project feasibility and/or execution using real-world databases (e.g,EMR, claims, etc.) across Astellas entire value chain geographic footprint and therapeutic areas.
The deliverables of the RWE Database Analyst are an integral part of the RWE analytics mission and requires expertise in creation, quality control and maintenance of efficient and rapid queries typically via SQL and SAS; as well as supporting the development and optimization of the database structures of real-world data sets.
Will be able to recognize issues as they generate and execute queries on existing databases, and build cohorts and create descriptive anlaysis summaries, in support of requests from within and outside RWI and will be able to collaborate with RWI colleagues to address these issues with minimal direction.
Work closely with an RWI Medical Coder to obtain appropriate drug, disease, and procedure codes in the creation of the queries.
Experience / Skills Required:
Prior has solid skills in SAS/SQL programming
Good understanding in data analysis, data structure and relational database in general.
Most the effective communication with all the interviewers and shared a good passion.
Job Requirements:,KellyMitchell matches the best IT and business talent with premier organizations nationwide. Our clients, ranging from Fortune 500 corporations to rapidly growing high-tech companies, are exceptionally served by our 1500+ IT and business consultants. Our industry is growing rapidly, and now is a great time to launch your career with the KellyMitchell team.

Location:
Downers Grove, IL 60515

Second Optional Work Location:
Chicago, IL 60638

Description:
Performs data collection, analysis, validation and reporting.
Designs, tests, and documents processes, SQL queries, and stored procedures.
Strong analytical and organizational skills also essential.
0 - 2 years experience
Notes From the Manager:
Excel Wizard (Advanced to Expert level)
Low level Data Analyst, no SQL required
Possible contract to hire, no guarantees
Able to perform pivot tables, functions, formulas, v-lookups, pivot reporting, macros, micros
About the Job:
This individual will be organizing, comparing, analyzing data.
They will receive a report from a 3rd party and then compare that report to Univar's internal reports to see where the data differs, understand why it differs, and communicate this to the manager.
This report has over 50,000 cells each report.
The hiring manager will need this individual to also add data, upload, edit, and change data as he sees errors and inconsistencies.
SQL is not required and this is a relatively low level Data Analyst role.
They must appear onsite for the first duration of their training and then will discuss remote work once they get started due to COVID-19,Job title: Data Production Analyst
Job type: Permanent
Emp type: Full-time
Salary:
Negotiable
Location: Chicago, IL
Job published: 2019-08-06
Job ID: 41432

Job Description


Our client is searching for an experienced Production Analyst to join their team in Chicago.

Responsibilities:
Perform directed research on a variety of datasets targeted at the consumer retail space to determine relevant trends, patterns, and classifications of data to be used in a larger investment process
Communicate the results of your research with investment analysts, portfolio managers, data scientists and engineers efficiently and directly
Own and be responsible for the integrity of your research by being detail oriented, process focused, and producing reproducible work that can stand up against interrogation from multiple stakeholders
Learn new technologies and techniques quickly
Requirements:
2 years of experience in data operations, engineering or analytics in either a professional or academic setting
Experience in scripting language (Python, R, perl, bash), SQL and Excel
Education:
Undergraduate Degree in Analytics, Computer Science, Finance/Business from competitive university
If you would like to be considered for the position of Production Analyst or wish to discuss the role further then please leave your details below. Your resume will be held in confidence until you connect with a member of our team,About Net2Source, Inc.
Net2Source Inc. is one of the fastest growing Global Workforce Solutions company with a growth of 100% YoY for last consecutive 3 years with over 2200+ employees globally and 30 locations in US and operations in 20 countries.
Net2Source is headquartered at NJ, USA. We offer a wide gamut of consulting solutions customized to our 450+ clients ranging from Fortune 500/1000 to Start-ups across various verticals like Technology, Banking, Financial Services, Healthcare, Life Sciences, Oil & Gas, Energy, Retail, Telecom, Utilities, Manufacturing, Aerospace & Defense and Engineering. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us! Want to read more about Net2Source? Visit us at www.net2source.com

Data Analyst
Northbrook, IL
6 Months+

Must Haves:
5+ years of experience within Data Analytics - (Data Strategy, Data Manipulation, Data Cleansing, Data Mapping, Root Cause Analysis)
Extensive experience writing complex SQL Queries (triggers, tables, joins, stored procedures)
Extensive experience working with Teradata and SAS EG databases
Experience creating visualizations in Tableau

Pluses:
Public Health domain experience

Day to Day:
Our client is looking for a seasoned Data Analyst to focus on correcting breaks/issues as it relates to queries when improper data outputs are identified. This resource will need to have a very analytical mindset with the ability to take a high-level issue, identify the specific problem, and then create/implement a solution.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission:
Net2Source, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Net2Source, Inc. is committed to ensuring equal employment opportunities for all candidates and employees. Hiring decisions are solely based upon job related criteria regardless of race, ethnicity, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), marital status, disability, age, national origin, political affiliation, retaliation, parental status, military service, other non-merit factor or any other status protected by U.S. law.

Regards,
Vaibhav Sharma
Talent Acquisition Specialist
Net2Source Inc.
Global HQ Address 7250 Dallas Pkwy, Suite 825 Plano, Texas 75024
Office: (201) 340-8700 x 495 | Cell: (201) 215 9185 | Fax: (201) 221-8131| Email: vsharma@net2source.com

Fast Facts about Net2Source:

Inception in 2007, privately held, Debt free
2200+ employees globally
375+ In- house Team of Sales, Account Management and Recruitment with coast to coast COE.
30 offices in US and 50+ Offices globally
Operations in 20 countries (US, Canada, Mexico, APAC, UK, UAE, Europe, Latin America, Japan, Australia)

Awards and Accolades:
2018 Fastest Growing IT Staffing Firm in North America by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 Fastest-Growing Private Companies in America as a 5 times consecutive honoree Inc. 5000
2018 - Spirit of Alliance Award by Agile1
2018 - 40 Under 40 Leadership Awards by Triangle Business Journal
2018 Fastest 50 by NJBIZ
2018 TechServe Excellence Award (IT and Engineering Staffing)
2018 Best of the Best Platinum Award by Agile1
2018 40 Under 40 Award Winner by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 CEO World Gold Award by SVUS
2017 Best of the Best Gold Award by Agile1,DescriptionTo apply to this Data Analyst IV role, please send your resume to John Sadofsky (john.sadofsky "AT" roberthalf.com)Provide advanced analytical support for business operationsExtract, load, model, and reconcile large amounts of data across multiple system platforms and sourcesDevelop reports and deliverables and make recommendations to managementModel data using MS Excel, Access, SQL, and/or other data ware house analytical toolsAssist management in driving business decisions based on dataEnsure compliance with federal and state deliverable reporting requirements by performing data quality audits and analysis.Assist with training and mentoring other Data Analysts.Assist with determining work load and related activities for other Data AnalystsRequirementsEducation/Experience: Bachelor's degree in related field or equivalent experience.6+ years of statistical analysis or data analysis experience.Healthcare experience preferred.Advanced knowledge of EnterpriseReporting and Analysis tools, SQL, and Microsoft Office applications, including Excel and Access.Experience managing projects or heavy involvement in project implementation. Robert Half Finance & Accounting matches skilled finance and accounting professionals in the areas of accounting, bookkeeping, finance, audit, taxation and more on a full-time basis. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the legal opportunities that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local office at 888.490.5461 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/finance to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. © 2020 Robert Half Finance & Accounting. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use. **Salary:** DOE**Location:** Chicago, IL**Date Posted:** July 11, 2020**Employment Type:** Full-time**Job Reference:** 01300-0010248321**Staffing Area:** Full-Time Accounting u0026 Finance,Top Marketing & Analytics company is looking to add to their Data Engineering group

This Jobot Job is hosted by: Craig Radke
Are you a fit? Easy Apply now by clicking the "Apply Now" button and sending us your resume.
Salary: $75,000 - $100,000

A bit about us:

Based in Chicago, we are a fast-growing company that is revolutionizing the Marketing Analytics Software space. We are actively looking to hire an experienced Data Analyst to join our team. This role will be responsible for the analysis and processing of raw client data. Responsibilities include working with SQL server to process raw client data into Foresights standard database schema, managing data cleaning/QA, and building custom reporting queries for internal analysis. This role is also expected to work cross-functionally with the client service and analytics teams to ensure that clients datasets are complete and accurate. Additionally, this role assists with creating the initial insights for a given client by providing an understanding of a clients dataset.

Why join us?
Competitive Base Salary!
Extremely Competitive benefits Package!
Flexible Work Schedules!
Accelerated Career Growth!


Job Details

Here is the background and experience we are looking for:
Bachelors Degree in marketing, statistics, computer science or a related field
Excellent analytical, problem-solving, and communication skills
Ability to handle multiple, complex projects in a deadline-driven environment
Relational database systems (SQL Server)
Demonstrated skill in ETL building systems such as SSIS or Alteryx
Demonstrated skill with data visualization tools such as Tableau

Domain Expertise:
Familiarity with Consumer-Packaged Goods (CPB) datasets such as point of sales and marketing data.
Ability to use business logic to manipulate client specific datasets into our standard.
Familiarity with relational database development and data warehousing.


Interested in hearing more? Easy Apply now by clicking the "Apply Now" button.,SAP Data Management Analyst, End User, Chicago Suburbs. My client a well known end user organisation are looking for a SAP Data Management Analyst to join their team, ideally they are looking for a minimum of 4+ years SAP Data experience. Candidates should have the following experience Minimum 4+ yearsrsquo experience in SAP ERP system experience as Super User or Information Technology Minimum 4+ years hands-on experience in Master Data Management functions Minimum 4+ years working with business processes related to Engineering Change Notices, Finance and Accounting, Customer Care, Manufacturing Operations, Global Sourcing, Distribution Logistics, or Sales Marketing processes. Finance. Preferably in a high volume discrete manufacturing environment. Expert-level skills in data quality and underlying processes to maintain and improve data quality Expert skills in Engineering Change processes, Manufacturing Operations, Sourcing and or Distribution logistics Ability to work cross-functionally and to learn and adapt to new business processes, technologies and environments. Expert-level analytical skills including data analysis, data profiling and reporting. Ability to build strong relationships with stakeholders collaborate effectively. Ability to estimate work efforts consistently and accurately manages own time to meet estimates and project deadlines Communicates clearly in both written and verbal communications able to explain technical solutions to a business person. Expert level skills in using Microsoft office tools Advanced Project Management skills Able to travel occasionally domestically Preferred Job Requirements Masterrsquos degree in Industrial Engineering, Business Administration, Information Systems or equivalent Experience with companies who have vertically integrated manufacturing and supply Chains Experience in global environments Experience with Winshuttle, Jira, Confluence, SharePoint Experience in 6-Sigma and lean methodologies Job Responsibilities Expert understanding of master data definition and usage of all cross-functional master data entities Expert understanding of manufacturing, sourcing and sales business processes and the underlying master data needed to properly implement SAP ERP systems Facilitate and Coordinate with Data users to analyze and resolve production data problems proactively Lead adoption and improvement to established master data processes, meet or exceed service level agreements measure and present work output reports Lead continuous improvement to work quality and enhanced audit and validation procedures observing data practices, policies, standards, processes and systems Drive IT and business stakeholders to document data standards, work instructions, processes documentation, knowledge management documentation and provide feedback on process improvements Lead implementation of supporting technology and management processes to automate master data management procedures - including but not limited to forms, scripts, macros, workflows and tracking artifacts Lead identification of opportunities to leverage information and analysis to improve business processes, and support business digitization efforts Plan, Execute and Monitor projects for on time, on budget and on scope. Provide performance reports, tracking mechanisms Timely reporting of actual time spent vs forecast and provide input to forecast process Provide accurate estimates and forecast of resource time and skills for project Facilitate and Coordinate data collection for new product development projects, including product promotion and maintaining data at different project stages. Drive data users to provide information needed and proactively raise issues and risk to project managers Maintain professional and technical knowledge by attending educational workshops, professional publications, establishing personal networks, and participating in professional societies Contribute to the team effort by accomplishing related results and participating on projects as needed Please do not hesitate to apply if this is of interest.,Senior Marketing Data Analyst | Multi-Family Real Estate | Chicago, IL Our highly successful real estate asset management firm is hiring an experienced Senior Marketing Data Analyst in their Chicago HQ office. The Sr. Marketing Data Analyst will hold responsibility for the development and management of reporting for global marketing trends, channel performance for both traditional and digital environments, financial analysis, and vendor performance in support of the marketing department, asset management, supporting departments and BX. This role will manage preferred partner (vendor) relationship and participate in the vetting and selection of these partners in support of the Marketing Director. The Sr. Marketing Data Analyst will report on financial performance of marketing spend and ROI as well as manage accounting and GL related procedures. Client company is offering highly competitive salary, bonus and benefit package.

Send resume and cover letter to: laura@esquire-recruiting.com

Benefits:

Excellent Benefits

Compensation:
$75,000 to $85,000 plus bonus
Responsibilities:
Provide reporting in a timely and accurate manner to marketing director, asset managers, executive leadership and other key stakeholders as may be determined.
Communicate analyses to key stakeholders within LivCor so that informed key strategic decisions may be made.
Manage reporting of marketing channel performance as related to cost per lead, cost per lease, conversion performance, and channel selection.
Extract, analyze, and report on digital marketing performance though Google Analytics, digital marketing reports and systems, and data site-crawl tools.
Develop and support the marketing department budget structures and general support of annual asset budget review, analysis, and adjustment.
Manage day to day accounting processes as related to marketing department managed GLs including, but not limited to, chart of accounts mapping, reclassing of expenses, and relationship management with external accounting team.
Maintain marketing department reporting structures and tools including, but not limited to, Oracle PBCS, Real Page BI, Rentlytics, Siteimprove, and Google Analytics.
Retrieve and analyze financial and operational data from, Oracle PBCS, Rentlytics, Real Page BI, Yardi, YieldStar, OneSite, Axiometrics, and other sources as may be determined.
Maintain subject matter expertise in topics including, but not limited to, digital marketing, website analytics, website structure support, industry standard technologies, etc.
Manage a platform, reporting, and action strategy for online reputation management at a portfolio, operating partner, and other grouped levels.
Develop productive working relationship with primary customer/end user of information to include the asset managers, department heads, operating partners and other key stakeholders.
Perform special ad hoc projects and analysis on a frequent basis.
Play primary role in management of marketing preferred technology providers as well as supporting the marketing director in the analysis and vetting of new and alternative preferred technology providers and vendors.
Manage the tactical deployment of preferred vendor systems and initiatives across assets and various operating partners.
Develop and manage vendor performance reporting.
Some travel required. Travel would be oriented around vendor relationships and industry related conferences/knowledge acquisition opportunities.
Requirements (Required):
A minimum of three (3) years’ work experience in data analysis and digital/traditional marketing.
Thorough understanding of digital marketing technologies, IP targeting, re-targeting, GEO fencing, email campaigns and digital nurturing campaigns
Strong analytical skills with a deep knowledge of and mastery of Excel.
A strong work ethic, the strength to thrive in a dynamic and demanding work environment and an ability to meet critical deadlines.
Excellent oral and written communication skills as well as design-oriented report development experience.
Requirements (Preferred):
Prior marketing agency experience and/or multifamily marketing management.
Prior experience with real estate budgeting/forecasting processes and systems.
Experience working at a publicly traded real estate, institutional financial services, or public/private equity firm preferred. In addition, experience in REIT performance metrics and reporting preferred.
Other Skills and Abilities:

Minimum of 3 years of experience in multifamily real estate marketing required. A focus in analysis preferred. Candidate must be proficient in Excel, online research, and knowledge of marketing plans. Candidate must have proven track record of providing high quality support and completing tasks.

Work Hours: 8:30 to 5:00,This position is responsible for working on multiple project tasks in support of the technical requirements and analysis to develop and validate a solution design in the data, information and ETL domains in support of an end-to-end analysis development, management, and delivery; intensive data analysis from a documentation, investigation and technical profiling (queries) perspective; interfacing between various business and technical teams to compile requirements and design solutions; providing technical leadership to the team; work closely with customers to build relationships; and continuously gaining a deeper understanding of relevant data and processes to build analytic solutions to meet business needs. Responsible for gathering and assessing business information needs and preparing system and data requirements. Performs analyses and profiling of the data, create detailed mapping documentation including transformation rules. Has an understanding of healthcare / payor data, subject areas, and source systems. Must understand data, data relationships at the table and attribute level. Able to interpret measurement definitions, and perform data decomposition. Perform Gap analysis and impact analysis on any changes that are being suggested. Possesses working knowledge of Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS) and data warehouse, including full reference architecture from data integration, through semantic layer and reporting. Strong knowledge of data and dimensional modeling. Experienced in group facilitation with participants from diverse business functions and work skills Qualifications: -Seven (7) plus years of experience with Online Transactional Processing (OLTP), data warehouse and dimensional modeling -Seven (7) plus years of experience with data modeling experience (conceptual, logical and physical) using a data modeling case tool -Seven (7) plus years of professional experience working in IT -Strong understanding of different data sources -SQL experience and ability to write SQL queries to provide data -Experience with Hue -Experience with canonical and industry models -Experience with Teradata or Oracle warehousing -Experience with DB2 -Ability to find data in DB2 and Teradata -Experience with Data Warehouse Measure calculation frameworks -Experience with ERWin -Strong understanding of Hive -HDFS experience and the ability to navigate and read data -Healthcare experience is a plus,The Client is searching for a contractor to work as a Data Governance and Analytics Analyst for our Financial client located in Chicago IL.The Data Governance & Analytics Analyst provides operational support for the coordination and adoption of capabilities by the Lines of Business. As a DG Analyst, you will collaborate within the DG&A team and across functions working on exciting projects moving the organization in maturity Data & Analytics. This position will support the Chief Data Officer and Data Governance Leaders with the following: -Define data quality standards and rules; develop, refine and implement data rules using SQL and data quality tools to ensure data is aligned with requirements within their assigned domain -Promote participation and consensus from business areas for data governance activities; Capture information requirements, developing data glossaries -Execute key Data Governance processes - intake/demand and prioritization process, issue management process, and monitoring processes -Analyze captured information and metrics for trends, risks and issues and report findings -Develop presentation material and documentation for regular core team and key governance forums (e.g. Executive Steering Committee, Decision Forums, DG Communities) to review progress and initiatives with key constituents -Monitor consistency with Data Governance policies and standards, drive continuous improvement, manage non-compliance issues, deliver training and communication Skills and Experience: -Possesses a university degree in Technology, Business or related field, and/or 10+ years relevant work experience -US Banking or Financial Services industry-specific knowledge and experience -Experience with multiple system conversions (Hadoop knowledge desired) -Knowledge of large-scale data architecture, master data management, business intelligence or similar projects -Understanding of data concepts, tools, and SQL. Ability to learn new tools to analyze data & data quality issues -Sound business and technical acumen, with demonstrated agility in learning and ability to quickly become comfortable with familiar businesses areas or of technologies -Excellent relationship management, presentation, written and verbal skills which bring clarity and precision at all levels within the organization -Excellent problem-solving and critical-thinking skills to recognize and comprehend complex issues, policies, regulatory requirements and industry information affecting the business environment Desired: -Experience with acquisition integrations -Have worked with at least one Enterprise Application (ERP) System or similar (Ex: SAP, Oracle Financials, etc). -5+ years in business/data analysis, Data Governance, or data quality -In depth knowledge of Data Governance / Data Quality processes and procedures,Job Title: Data Analyst

Location: Remote

Duration: Contract

Rate: DOE

Start Date: ASAP!

Job Description

Our client is looking for a financial/cost analyst to join the team on a contract basis to help keep track of the various projects that in motion!

Responsibilities:
Compiles cost estimates by collecting, monitoring, and studying data; recommending actions.
Coordinates Purchase Order requisitions to support ongoing efforts.
Tracks Statement of Work, Master Service Agreements and other documents as they move through approval process
Assists program leads in ensuring policy and procedures for financial spend are followed
Duties:
Determines cost of operations by establishing standard costs; collecting operational data.
Identifies financial status by comparing and analyzing actual results with plans and forecasts.
Guides cost analysis process by establishing and enforcing policies and procedures; providing trends and forecasts; explaining processes and techniques; recommending actions.
Improves financial status by analyzing results; monitoring variances; identifying trends; recommending actions to management.
Reconciles transactions by comparing and correcting data.
Maintains database by entering, verifying, and backing up data.
Recommends actions by analyzing and interpreting data and making comparative analyses; studying proposed changes in methods and materials.
Increases productivity by developing automated accounting applications; coordinating information requirements.
Protects operations by keeping financial information confidential.
Maintains technical knowledge by attending educational workshops; reviewing publications.
Contributes to team effort by accomplishing related results as needed,Icon has an immediate need for Data Analyst for a 6+ month contract in Houston, TX (77002). This position offers the possibility of extension and/or conversion to full-time employment, and pays up to $75/hour depending on experience.Summary:

The Enterprise Analytics & Data Management team is part of the ***s Digital organization. Our mission is to accelerate business growth and drive operational efficiencies by extracting insights from data, predicting business outcomes and embedding intelligence into business processes. As a member of EADM you will deliver insights and solutions across the organization in areas such as routing, logistics, revenue management, customer experience, people analytics, business operations and more.

I. Job Summary:
The Data Analyst will participate in all aspects of the data management lifecycle, which includes sourcing, cleansing, strategy/assessment work and project implementation work related to enterprise planning and reporting. Additionally, the Data Analyst will provide insights beyond the data management lifecycle by working with internal stakeholders to turn data into actionable insights.
The ideal candidate should be highly skilled in all aspects of data analytics, including sourcing, cleansing, generation, and visualization. Additionally, S/he should be committed to transforming data into readable, goal-driven reports for continued innovation and growth.

II. Essential Duties and Responsibilities:
• Assist with developing data quality standards and process across all data domains and enhance/modify as needed.
• Collaborate with data stewards to design and develop data quality measures and quality standardization, cleansing, and enrichment rules.
• Identify, prioritize and implement new areas for data enrichment/quality using enterprise data from across the domains as well as external data.
• Support remediation of prioritized data quality issues.
• Evaluate organizational methods and provide source-to-target mappings and information-model specification documents for data sets.
• Create best-practice reports based on data mining, analysis, and visualization.
• Evaluate internal systems for efficiency, problems, and inaccuracies, developing and maintaining protocols for handling, processing, and cleaning data.
• Work directly with management and users to gather requirements, provide status updates, and build relationships.
• Manages relationships with external suppliers of data and specialized analysis/research organizations.
• Stitching together disparate pieces of data to form cohesive business cases for improvement.
• Performs other duties as assigned.

III. Qualifications:
The requirements listed below are representative of the qualifications necessary to perform the job.
A. Education and Experience
• Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Social Science, Statistics, Data Science, Data Analytics, or Market Research.
• 2-4 years of experience in similar roles.
• Proven analytic skills, including mining, evaluation, analysis, and visualization.
• Technical writing experience in relevant areas, including queries, reports, and presentations.
• Strong SQL or Excel skills with the ability to learn other analytic tools.
• Prior experience with database and model design and segmentation techniques.
• Practical experience in analysis using statistical packages including Excel, SPSS, R, and SAS.

B. Certificates, Licenses, Registrations or Other Requirements:
• None required

C. Other Knowledge, Skills or Abilities Required:
• Strong written and oral communication skills with ability to work with users, peers and management.
• Strong interpersonal skills.
• Ability to work independently and as part of a team to successfully execute projects.
• Highly motivated, self-starter with problem solving skills.
• Ability to multitask and meet aggressive deadlines efficiently and effectively.
• Detail-oriented but does not lose sight of the big picture.
• Demonstrate ability to learn and understand business processes quickly.

IV. Work Environment:
Listed below are key points regarding environmental demands and work environment of the job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions of the job.
• Required to use motor coordination with finger dexterity (such as keyboarding, machine operation, etc.) most of the work day;
• Required to exert physical effort in handling objects less than 30 pounds occasionally;
• Required to be exposed to physical occupational risks (such as cuts, burns, exposure to toxic chemicals, etc.) rare;
• Required to be exposed to physical environment which involves dirt, odors, noise, weather extremes or similar elements rare;

Job Requirements:,job summary:
Data Engineer needed for a large organization in Northwest Houston. The data engineer will support the production, fulfillment, and logistics teams in delivering ongoing performance enhancements for customers and drive continuous improvement.

location: Houston, Texas
education: Bachelors,My client is looking for a Business Analyst (Data Integration/Salesforce) to join their growing team!

Title: Business Analyst (Data Integration/Salesforce)
Location: Remote
Type: 6+ month contract

Our client is looking for an Salesforce Business Analyst to help them with the following initiatives:

Must Haves:
Experience integrations between Salesforce and other systems is very key. Solid understanding of data systems, including data relationships and data modeling with the ability to learn and understand various data environments. End to end implementation experience, systems development, implementation, integration experience, including between different business systems as well as working with integration tools, QA testing, system design and analysis, project management, conducting training, strong analytical skills and communication skills.

Job Summary:
Conducts business process analysis, detailed requirement gathering, document user stories, prioritize backlog and preliminary cost/benefit analyses in an effort to align information technology solutions with business initiatives.
II. Essential Duties and Responsibilities include the following. To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform the assigned essential duties satisfactorily. Other minor duties may be assigned and duties may vary by department.
" Possess a fundamental understanding of end-to-end customer experience integration and dependencies.
" Works in an Agile environment and continuously reviews the business needs, refines priorities, outlines milestones and deliverables, and identifies opportunities and risks.
" Develops, owns, and executes product roadmap.
" Translates product roadmap features into well-defined product requirements including features, epics, user stories, and acceptance test criteria.
" Prioritizes and maintains the sprint backlog for assigned products, balancing the requirements of stakeholders.
" Work collaboratively with team members to design a solution that will meet business requirements and fulfill user stories
" Acts as a liaison between technical staff and business owners.
" Collaborate with developers to test and verify that solutions will meet the business requirements
" Participate in key meetings including discovery sessions, sprint demos, user acceptance testing, and end user training

Please send resumes to Felix.Fermin@mondo.com,Description Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PLSQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization. Essential DutiesResponsibilities -Develop Oracle PLSQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements. -Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PLSQL code. -Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment. -Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PLSQL code. -Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly -Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates. -Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations. -Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business. -Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests. -Experienced in any source code versioning tool -Follow SOX procedures for code deployment. -Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled. -Monitor batch processes dailyweeklymonthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-runre-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends. -Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements. -Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible. Requirements Experience including but not limited to - 15+ years of experience in Software development - 10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g - 10+ years of experience in Oracle PLSQL development - 3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment - Strong Analytical skills - Troubleshooting skills o Team Player Additional skills -Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must. -Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams. Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.comjobstechnology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer MFDisabilityVeterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use httpswww.roberthalf.comterms-of-use .,Hi ,Â

This is SmithÂfrom Yochana Solutions; We are looking Data Warehouse Analyst Located in Houston, TX thebelow mentioned job description.ÂKindly forward me your resume, rate and contact details for further process at smith@yochana.comÂor reach me at 949-201-1313.

Position: Data Warehouse Analyst

Location: Houston, TX

Duration: Long Term contact

Â

Note: Visa USC/GC

Need locals to TX

Â

Job Description:
Design, develop, test, maintain, and support batch applications using Oracle PL/SQL for Retail Commissions and Amortization.

Essential Duties/Responsibilities:
â Develop Oracle PL/SQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements.
â Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PL/SQL code.
â Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment.
â Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PL/SQL code.
â Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly
â Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates.
â Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations.
â Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business.
â Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests.
â Experienced in any source code versioning tool
â Follow SOX procedures for code deployment.
â Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled.
â Monitor batch processes daily/weekly/monthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-run/re-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends.
â Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements.
â Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible.
Â

Â

Â

Thanks and Regards,

Â

Smith

Â

Sr. Technical Recruiter

Yochana Solutions INC

23000 Commerce Dr, Farmington hills, MI-48335

Direct No: 949-201-1313

smith@yochana.com || www.yochana.com

Note: This is not an unsolicited mail. If you are not interested in receiving our e-mails then please reply with subject line Remove

Â

Â

Â

Â

Â,primary role is to assemble, sort and decipher information into "database queries or data fields for computer analysisA data analyst uses the information he collects to provide statistical results that address problems presented by a client. The client will then use the data prepared by the data analyst to advance research, assess issues of importance or present to other interested parties. Key accountabilities include: -Generate advanced Excel workbooks with complex formulas and create flow profile charts/graphs based on calculated data -Analyze oil, gas and/or water flow profiles and include in customer frac reports -Write and review technical frac reports for customers in a timely manner -Generate final frac reports including all data, analysis, and charts/graphs -Assists in all aspects of frac data report requirements for customers Skills Knowledge / Attributes required -Excellent written English and technical report writing skills. -Proficient in the use of the Microsoft Office. -Strong communication and interpersonal skills. -Ability to be a self-starter who can work with minimal direct supervision, take ownership of projects, and coordinate the inflow of data from the various sources. -Strong organizational skills and attention to detail. -Must be flexible and willing to help on miscellaneous assigned projects. -Familiar with the technical aspects of oil drilling, stimulation, and production preferred.,Job Description
Our Client, a Fortune 200 Corporation based in Sugarland TX has Immediate Opportunities for experienced Master Data Management Data Analysts to join their team on a long-term contract basis. Initially all work will be remote based. This team will deliver insights and solutions across the organization in areas such as fleet management, revenue management, customer experience, people analytics, business operations and more.

The Data Analyst works closely with the Solution Architect and will be responsible for the development, management, coordination and maintenance of master data architecture, practices, procedures, reporting, analysis and execution. Coordinate and collaborate with all functional areas to ensure effective and accurate processing of master data details and ensure strict governance of master data activities in accordance with documented procedures

§ Create and maintain documentation of Master Data processes for all domains
§ Interact with various domains, vendor/tool SMEs and other internal departments on a regular basis
§ Reports on monthly key metrics, and ad-hoc reporting nerds
§ Analyzes and applies appropriate data review processes to audit and cleanse master data sets including duplicate records and compliance with naming and address standards
§ Assist with ad-hoc reporting needs from business users
§ Analyze Customer, Vendor, and Material requests that are received for validity, proper approvals, documentation, and duplication. Communicate with requestor if any additional information is required. Advise and train sales administration, customer service, and other employees on the processes and procedures for Customer creation requests
§ Perform complex analyses (analytical, quantitative and qualitative)
§ Build solutions as needed
§ Full lifecycle implementation experience
§ Knowledge of end-to-end MDM development process
§ Coordinate and perform assigned day to day tasks for the creation, maintenance and data quality of master data including customer, vendor, employee, material and profile records while verifying input accuracy in accordance with written and controlled MDM procedures
§ Create, maintain and verify North America customer and vendor records, as well as employee grades
§ Security and User access controls monitoring
§ Audit and verify incoming information to ensure accuracy and completeness prior to processing into production systems while tracking and maintaining all backup copies in an organized fashion
§ Analyzes, monitors and answers email questions that come through the group inbox and shares responsibility with team members for problem resolution

Required:
§ Bachelor's degree or equivalent combination of education and experience
§ Bachelor's degree in information science, data management, computer science or related field preferred
§ Six or more years of experience in data analysis or computer programming
§ Experience working with industry standards, regulations, and guidelines in database warehousing and other relevant systems
§ Experience working with company hardware and software products to make sound financial recommendations
§ Experience working with information security practices and available security software packages
§ Experience working with domain structures, user authentication, and digital signatures
§ Experience working with relational databases

Preferred:
§ Ensure master data integrity in key systems as well as maintaining the processes to the data quality
§ Identify areas for data quality improvements and help to resolve data quality problems through the appropriate choice of error detection and correction, process control and improvement, or process design strategies
§ Ensures quality of master data in key systems, as well as development and documentation of processes with other functional data owners to support ongoing maintenance and data integrity
§ Good personal computer and business solutions software skills
§ Good communication skills to communicate with customers, team members, external data providers, and management
§ Good skills in data administration, design, and architecture
§ Good analytical and problem-solving skills
Company Description
ABOUT DELPHI-US
Delphi-US provides world class talent acquisition solutions to our clients nationwide. We are experts in Information Technology, Engineering, Professional, and select specialized talent recruitment. With a collective 30+ years in our field, Delphi-US brings true best practices to the industry, and a fundamental approach that drives excellence in results for our clients and consultants. Known as 'The Peacemakers in The Talent War', Delphi-US seeks to join the best and brightest of our knowledge workforce to select employers of choice throughout the United States.,Job Description
Smith Hanley Associates
Senior Data Analyst
Houston, TX
$80,000 - 115,000
Contact: Nancy Darian, ndarian@smithhanley.com

Houston manufacturing company is seeking a Senior Data Analyst to optimize production and logistics processes. You will query data, develop models and analysis, and provide reports and insights to improve operational performance. Use your full time manufacturing or operations analytics experience in this challenging role.

NOTE: Visas cannot be transferred or sponsored.

Responsibilities of the Senior Data Analyst:
--Use SQL to mine large datasets, develop reports and dashboards and provide insights, leading to improved manufacturing and logistics processes.
--Conduct analytically driven experiments using R or Python to determine optimal business solutions.
--Present findings and recommendations to manufacturing and logistics leaders.
--Produce powerful visualizations using Tableau or other software.
--Use statistics to highlight root causes of performance failures.

Qualifications of the Senior Data Analyst:
--Minimum of 2 years of full time analytics experience in a manufacturing environment.
--Solid Python or R as well as SQL and Tableau experience in a full time business setting.
--Proven ability to model and manipulate large datasets to produce measurable process improvements.
--Proficiency in statistical techniques.
--Experience working with production and logistics teams to solve business challenges.
--Master's degree in a quantitative field (statistics,engineering, math or other).
--Superior communication and influencing skills.

If this job isn't for you, see our other open positions at www.jobs.smithhanley.com.

Smith Hanley Associates takes pride in being the premier recruiting agency serving the marketing analytics industry. For more information, please visit our website at www.smithhanley.com.,DData Governance Business Analyst
Houston, TX 77002
Pay Rate: $70/hr - $80/hr
Contract: Through – 12/20 (FTE Conversion or Extension)

The Enterprise Analytics & Data Management team is part of the ***’s Digital organization. Our mission is to accelerate business growth and drive operational efficiencies by extracting insights from data, predicting business outcomes and embedding intelligence into business processes. As a member of EADM you will deliver insights and solutions across the organization in areas such as routing, logistics, revenue management, customer experience, people analytics, business operations and more.

I. Job Summary
The Data Governance Business Analyst plays a critical role in establishing policies and requirements of master data and resolves data quality issues. They will work closely with business partners to turn data into critical information and knowledge that can be used to make sound business decisions. This individual must function in a fast-paced environment, be adaptable to the many changing processes and technology related to the various data warehouse environments. The ideal candidate for this position understands business processes and how data drives those processes, has a strong commitment to quality, is detail oriented and understands how to leverage tools, such as software to execute projects and tasks efficiently.

II. Essential Duties and Responsibilities
Execute standard onboarding of technical and business metadata into the Informatica EDC and Axon environments, ensuring the population of data lineage and linkage between the technical and business metadata.
Participate in the development and implementation of enterprise metadata standards, guidelines, and processes to ensure quality metadata and support for ongoing data governance.
Provide excellent customer service and support to end users and form productive relationships with internal customers by listening, clarifying, and responding effectively.
Providing administration support for Informatica EDC/Axon/IDQ and in future other data governance related products (MDM) which includes installation, configuration, upgrades and business continuity support.
Facilitate discussion with data stakeholders on data governance processes and translate those requirements into Axon workflows.
Participate in training sessions for business and technology partners covering enterprise metadata standards, guidelines, and processes
Document data governance policies and master data entry processes
Perform data alignment analyses to support data governance
Design tools and processes to facilitate maintenance of data quality in Informatica IDQ.
Perform other duties as assigned.
III. Supervisory Responsibilities
None required.

IV. Qualifications
The requirements listed below are representative of the qualifications necessary to perform the job.

Bachelor’s degree in Business, Finance, Accounting, Management Information systems or related field

3-5 years of progressive business experience
Must have 3+ years of hands on Informatica Data Governance (Axon), EDC, IDQ experience.
Must have 3+ MDM experience.
Must have 2+ years of practical experience configuring EDC and Axon, including business glossaries, dashboards, policies, search, Axon maps
Experience in data quality tools, including data profiling, cleansing and identity resolution.
A. Domain Experience
Demonstrated understanding of data governance principles.
Demonstrated experience with data management.
Demonstrated proficiency of data (types, content reliability, etc.).
Demonstrated problem solving and data collection, analysis, and interpretation skills.
Demonstrated understanding of underlying databases.
B. Certificates, Licenses, Registrations or Other Requirements
None required; Informatica Certification highly desired
C. Other Knowledge, Skills or Abilities Required
Strong written and oral communication skills with ability to work with users, peers and management.
Strong interpersonal skills.
Must be a team player as this role requires working with multiple teams.
Highly motivated, self-starter with problem solving skills.
Ability to multitask and meet aggressive deadlines efficiently and effectively.
Detail-oriented but does not lose sight of the big picture.
Demonstrate ability to learn and understand business processes quickly.
V. Work Environment
Listed below are key points regarding environmental demands and work environment of the job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions of the job.,To support our Global Business Performance team within the Advanced Materials division, we are looking for a Software Developer Business Analyst for TM1 with a strong knowledge of VBA (AccessExcel) and SQL. Your main tasks and responsibilities are For two reporting areas (Production and Purchasing) trouble shoot current tool in case of errors and support monthly reloads (Access Excel and SQL) Support business requests such as data extraction or report adjustments Document logic of current tool to prepare for migration to TM1 Understand tables and queries functions Identify improvement simplification options Rebuild the tools in TM1 Requirements Degree in Data Science (Information System, Computer Science) is required. Experience and sound knowledge in Business, Finance, Accounting or other technical discipline is a plus Very strong command of Access, Excel, MS Excel VBA and SQL is a must Knowledge of Webi is a strong asset Knowledge of data maintenance and data extraction Previous experience with report tool migration between systems is a plus 2-5 years of experience in a similar position Fast comprehension of business activities is needed along with a problem-solving approach Very good analytical, communication and interpersonal skills Innovative team player, detailed oriented and working with high level of accuracy Fluent in English, any other language is an asset,Job Description
Our client is a leading full-service provider of cost-effective management solutions for used healthcare materials and unused dispensed medications generated outside the hospital and large healthcare facility setting.

The Company seeks a Jr. Software Developer to join our focused IT team. In this role, you will make an impact by combining traditional development with user-centric design and research skills. Our fast-moving multi-disciplinary team balances their time between supporting users and listening to their evolving needs to adjust the systems that support the business. You will help integrate existing accounting and warehouse operations systems that are the backbone of the company with modern web services and develop new solutions that allow the business to continue to grow. You are a great creator, collaborator, and communicator with a curious mind and an ability to work both within and outside a strict production timeline. As part of a fast-moving team, you can work across multiple groups and successfully uncover critical insights that can be level up the business. In return, you will end up with a clear understanding of each facet of the business, be able to watch your projects grow, know how you are making an impact, and build your career.

Responsibilities:
• Work across multi-disciplinary teams from operations, accounting, and warehouse to understand how to evolve and support our current ERP systems
• Partner with a senior developer to support current development projects
• Understand the array of technical constraints, user goals, and business requirements that shape relevant current and future products

Requirements:
• 1+ years of experience in Web Development
• 3+ years of experience in relevant development experience
• BS/BA in Computer Science or equivalent education or experience
• Experience with the following technologies: SQL Server or other RDBMS, Python, C#, and .Net Core
• Familiar with accounting and terminology: AR, AP, GL, Financial reporting, Audits and documentation
• Strong coding, debugging, and problem-solving skills
• Independent, with internal drive and self-motivated to make an impact as part of a team
• Self-learner with a passion for technologies

Preferred:
• Experience with the following technologies: Sage 500 ERP, MS SQL Server, Salesforce, IIS, web APIs
We offer a comprehensive benefits package including medical, dental, vision, short- and long-term disability, 401K with match, paid holidays and vacations.,Leading Consumer Goods Company Looking For Financial Analyst - Data Mining, Analytics, Reporting

This Jobot Job is hosted by: Josh Raymond
Are you a fit? Easy Apply now by clicking the "Apply Now" button and sending us your resume.
Salary: $65,000 - $80,000

A bit about us:

We're an established, yet growing, consumer goods company that provides personal beauty products. We're based in the United States and have a global customer base along with impressive YoY growth. Due to growth, our elite Finance team is looking for a Financial Analyst to join the team. In this highly visible role, you'll be reporting directly to our Controller and will be responsible for creating key financial reporting tools and providing insight into the financial performance of our company.

If you're a Financial Analyst with 7+ years of experience, then please read on...

Why join us?
Competitive Compensation!
Great Benefits!
Company Matched 401(k)!
Growth Opportunities!


Job Details

What you'll be doing...
Develop mission-critical reporting tools that provide insight into the health of the company
Provide support for Accounting & Financial Analytics and Reporting
Leverage your experience synthesizing data to deliver actionable insights
Mine large structured & unstructured data sets using data science & analytical techniques to generate insights
Develop models to predict potential future outcomes along with optimizing business solutions by identifying patterns using raw data
Translate findings into accessible visuals, providing a clear view into interpreting the data
Analyze and interpret financial data and compile reports on current financials
Define benchmarks, generate insights, develop dashboards and monitor and report progress against them
Perform monthly review and evaluate actual financial performance
Analyze financial information to produce forecasts

What we're looking for...
7+ years of experience with financial analysis and/or accounting
Strong analytical skills and a demonstrated ability to analyze raw data and develop actionable insights
Strong presentation skills and the ability to communicate complex subject matter
Advanced Excel skills
Experience with data visualization software (i.e. Tableau) is preferred

So, it you're a Financial Analyst with 7+ years of hands-on experience then please apply today!

Interested in hearing more? Easy Apply now by clicking the "Apply Now" button.,Job Description
Splunk SME / Data Analyst

Houston, TX 77002 (local candidates only)

Contract opportunity

Opportunity to help transform Client's computing environment! Serve an integral role of EUSAs (End User Solution Asset) modern portfolio initiatives.

Splunk SME/Data Analyst for the Cross-Asset Performance Sustainability Team (CAPS) within the Information Technology Business Unit in Houston, TX.

As a Splunk SME/Data Analyst, this position provides technical expertise to EUSA CAPS Team. This position works closely with various teams seeking to improve computing performance. The SME/analyst position provides data analytics consulting and support with a specific emphasis on working within the Splunk software. This position is an individual contributor role working among a team of analysts to design and develop analytical reporting and solutions.
Serve as technical lead for Client's team for Splunk Analysis
Collaborate with key stakeholders and members of the CAPS team to create advanced dashboards and various user control elements
Provide statistical analysis and support around client's computing environment
Engage stakeholders to scope, prioritize and deliver descriptive, diagnostic and predictive data analytics
Collaborate with stakeholders to develop and maintain EUSAs data analytics strategy with a focus on business value
Key Qualifications:

Technology
Bachelor Degree in a related area
Minimum 3+ years of experience in writing Splunk queries
At least 5+ years of IT experience- strong technical background required
Minimum of 4-5+ years of strong data analytics/data science experience required
Data science, data analytics experience using Splunk required
Splunk dashboarding experience required
Experience delivering data analysis, working with relational databases, and writing Splunk queries to retrieve data for analysis and reporting purposes
Proficient in writing SPL (Search Processing Language), including advanced commands such as tstats, lookup, using subquery, etc. Able to correlate multiple data sources efficiently
Proficient in creating advanced dashboards, including drill down and various user control elements to present to leadership.
Knowledge of statistical analysis
At least 2 out of the 3 following Splunk certification required: Splunk Core Certified User, Splunk Core Certified Power User, Splunk Certified Admin – desired
Communication
SAFE/Agile Project experience required
Strong written and verbal skills with the ability to effectively engage business and technical resources at all levels
Ability to develop strategic relationships with business leaders, vendors and partners
Listens carefully and asks questions to understand the views and concerns of others
Strong facilitation and presentation skills
Execution
Drive for results in keeping with Client Policy Standards and Tenets of Operation
Identify and mitigate risks; contribute different points of view to enhance decisions; deliver on commitments
Collaborate across multiple organizations, business units, and functions, and guide team to achieve goals
• Candidates local to Houston required.

Preferred:
Data Analytics or Data Science certifications are a big plus
Knowledge of Machine Learning Toolkit (MLTK) a plus but not required
Basic experience with Regex (regular expression) queries preferred
Knowledge of UberAgent and/or end user computing performance monitoring – PLUS
Ability to advocate data in Power BI – big plus
Travel Requirements: Up to 5% travel, on occasion if needed,Essential Duties/Responsibilities:
Develop Oracle PL/SQL packages, stored procedures, functions, objects, tables, views, synonyms based on requirements.
Unit test, System test, Integration test, and Parallel test of the Oracle PL/SQL code.
Optimize code by following performance tuning techniques considering limitations of current environment.
Use Oracle Analytical functions, merge statements, with clause, oracle partitioning, job logging, exception handling, performance tuning and so on in the Oracle PL/SQL code.
Use analytics skills to troubleshoot and resolve problems quickly
Work with Team Lead and other members of the Commissions IT team to understand requirements, identify source data, understand the source tables and relationships, adhere to consistent coding standards, do code reviews, and provide daily status updates.
Work with the Commissions Project team to understand the reporting requirements for each workstream and build, test, and UAT according to their expectations.
Work effectively in a team environment. Develop strong working relationship with members of Commissions IT team, Commissions Project team, Project Management team, and Business.
Get familiarized with the ServiceNow ticketing system for opening, handling, and closing tickets and change requests.
Experienced in any source code versioning tool
Follow SOX procedures for code deployment.
Create ControlM job documents and work with ControlM to get them created and scheduled.
Monitor batch processes daily/weekly/monthly and resolve job failures as quickly as possible. Work with ControlM group on re-run/re-start instructions. Willingness to perform this off hours during weekdays and weekends.
Provide production support of the application and satisfy requests for data updates, ad-hoc reports or minor enhancements.
Communicate status and escalate issues or delays that would impact deadline as early in the process as possible.

Education:
Bachelor's degree in computer science, software engineering or relevant business discipline from an accredited four-year college or university or equivalent work experience.

Experience:
Experience including but not limited to
15+ years of experience in Software development
10+ years of experience in Oracle 10g or 11g
10+ years of experience in Oracle PL/SQL development
3+ years of experience in a Data Warehouse environment
Strong Analytical skills
Troubleshooting skills
o Team Player

Additional skills:
Flexibility, Dedication, Consistency, Integrity, and Enthusiasm a must.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills are required in order to interact with other team members, Team Lead, End user, Business, Project Manager, and other teams.,The resource(s) best suited for this activity have/are:
SAP Ariba Knowledge.
Legal Background and Contracts Knowledge.
Investigative Qualities.
Able to Correlate Data.
Based in Houston, Texas and able to work downtown.
Detailed oriented.
Inquisitive, Curious and unafraid to ask questions.
Able to work independently at a computer performing tactical level activities.
Law students in L2 or L3 that are able to work 40 hours are acceptable candidates.
High Level Scope:
Identify Contract Meta Data (existing and what needs to be captured).
Export Contract Meta Data (i.e. data stored in the Contract Overview Tab fields captured).
Divide and assign work to resources.
Review the executed contract attached to an Ariba Contract Workspace to:
Confirm contract hierarchy.
Identify applicable missing information in the Excel file and capture from contract.
Validate information already captured to ensure accuracy, correcting any incorrect data fields in the Excel file.
Once the contract line item has been updated in the Excel file, for eventual uploading back into the Ariba Contract Workspace through mass editing;
Confirm the required documents are in the Final Documents folder within the Document Tab of the Contract Workspace. This may include: a signed or countersigned Agreement, or both, final word version of the Agreement, final word version of a Legacy Contract, Contract Approval Form (CAF), and the PDF copy of the CAF (when the contact is a Legacy Contract).
Determine additional clean-up activities, including but not limited to:
Renaming the contract workspace accordingly with our standard nomenclature.
Identifying team members not within each contract workspace.
Identifying perpetual contracts or types of contracts that need to have an updated end date.
Correction of workspace statuses.,Location Phoenix, AZ Description Our client is currently seeking a Jr. Analyst DataReporting position for the Phoenix, AZ area. Candidate should be Local. For immediate consideration email copy of current resume to Amanda at ajauriguejudge.com. This job will have the following responsibilities Manage 1-3 mid-sized projects in a fast-paced, dynamic environment. Manage business and technical deliverables to the project budget and timeline throughout the various project phases. Develop and document project plans, budgets and schedules. Identify and document the roles, tasks, and responsibilities of the project team. Must have strong project management and project planning experienceknowledge with demonstrated ability to drive projects to successful completion. Solid experience and understanding of Agile Scrum andor Rational Unified Process Methodology. Expert knowledge of MS Project is required. Familiarity with MS Office 2010, Clarity, SharePoint, and Team Foundation Server desired. Strong knowledge of Visio and PMP certification is a plus. Background experience in the financial services industry and experience with Iterative Development methodologies is highly desirable. Requirements -Part of DAG Project (Data Assurance Governance). This person will be working on a project that is essentially converting over old DBs to their new DBs, they will need to work through a list of DBs on a monthly basis and build a list the ones that they are able to convert over based on the criteria provided to them. This info will be sent over to the DBA teams who will do the more technical work. - They Will Need Strong Experience with Excel including VLookups, Pivot Tables and Macros would be a plus. Experience working with Data and Analytics - help analyze the DBs on what needs to be done for a list of users or access. Experience with reporting (Tableau might be a plus but they don't need it) Strong experience with documentation - as they will be ensuring all of the proper steps are taken before the DB is set to convert. Strong communication skills- assertive attitude. Assist the Project Manager on the team if she has tasks this person can help offset. Qualifications Requirements 2 or more years of experience in large, complex and cross functional projects, with emphasis on systems, technologies, business process redesign, and knowledge of technical environment. Familiarity with Identity and Access Management practices and tools. Demonstrated analytical work with a track record of fully understanding business process requirements and use cases. Excellent written and verbal communication skills, interpersonal and collaborative skills, and the ability to communicate security and risk-related concepts to technical and non-technical audiences. Critical thinker with strong problem-solving skills. Strong interpersonal, analytical, problem-solving, influencing, prioritization, decision-making and conflict resolution skills. Excellent writtenverbal communication skills. Strong knowledge of MS Office tools (Excel, MS Word,Visio, etc.) tool along with general familiarity with Outlook and other MS Office applications is also required Contact ajauriguejudge.com mailtoajauriguejudge.com?subjectJr.20Analyst20Data2FReporting This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com httpwww.judge.com,Ref ID: 00215-0011486780Classification: Data Analyst

Compensation: $20.90 to $23.00 hourly

We are hiring for a large financial institution in North Phoenix...please apply if you meet the qualifications. Responsible for examining and analyzing programs, processes, claims, documentation and/or files of unusual, complex and/or higher risk transactions to ensure compliance with internal company requirements and/or agency or government regulations. Clearly communicates overall process or transaction quality and provides feedback to appropriate contacts regarding identified material deficiencies or issues including identification of inconsistencies. Analyzes risks and offsets and develops solutions for problems identified. Acts as mentor to lower level team members and may assist with their development. Provides support for exam management activities and any other initiatives as needed. 4+ years experience in one or more of the following: quality assurance; operations; loan documentation; loan servicing; or underwriting.

Job Requirements:
QA - Quality Assurance, Analysis

Accountemps, a Robert Half Company, matches highly skilled professionals with accounting finance jobs on a temporary and temporary-to-hire basis. From accounting clerks and bookeepers to accounts payable and staff accountants, we provide you with access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the legal opportunities that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local Accountemps office at 888.490.3195 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/accountemps to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Accountemps. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,The Data Analyst is responsible for providing accurate, complete and meaningful reports and analysis used for business management and decision making. The Senior Data Analyst works closely with department and/or functional managers to determine report requirements, build reports, and quality test them prior to distribution. The Senior Data Analyst also provides support with project management services for large data projects.

Essential Job Functions
• Develops and deploys reporting and analysis that is accurate, complete and properly summarized to aid in management of business and management decision making. Responsible for extracting and summarizing data from JDE and other corporate systems.
• Has expert knowledge of JDE tables and field usage. Has thorough knowledge of other corporate software, programs and data tools. Assists managers with report design and development. Tests reports and ensures that they perform as expected.
• Understands flow of data internally and in relation to the General Ledger.
• Produces weekly, monthly, and quarterly trend and activity reports as well as other operational and management reports. Ensures that reports are produced per scheduled timelines for review by functional management teams.
• Analyzes large amounts of data and investigates and researches anomalies. Works with department and/or functional teams to correct issues when identified.
• Works with IT Business Intelligence team to design, test and deploy MRE reports for general usage.
• Provides support to management to produce reports and analyze large amounts of data as part of acquisitions or other special projects.
• Produces ad-hoc reporting as assigned.

TekCom Resources, Inc. is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer and values diversity. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and business need. We are compliant with the Fair Chance Ordinance as applicable, and will consider all qualified applications for employment.,Job Description
Data Analyst

Parker & Lynch is currently conducting a direct hire search for a Data Analyst in Phoenix, AZ. Our client is seeking an experienced Analyst who wants to leverage their analytical and technical skills to make an immediate and meaningful impact on the business. If you are looking for a company that has a culture including arcade games, nap pods, strong philanthropy ties, and work-life balance, this might be your dream job!

Responsibilities:
Working closely with stakeholders across the organization to best understand their reporting and analysis needs.
Help make company-wide data driven decisions.
Create powerful visualizations and dashboards in Tableau and Excel.
Collaborate with company leaders to design systems to capture data to drive future decisions and help prioritize engineering efforts around proposed technology solutions.
Qualifications:
1-5 years of data or business analyst experience.
Strong SQL knowledge.
Experience with Excel and Tableau.
Experience with R and Python is a plus.
Education:
Bachelor’s Degree required.
If you feel that you are a good fit for this position in Phoenix, AZ- apply today at www.parkerandlynch.com,6777722
Silicon Valley Bank Banking SAS/Python Data Analyst 6+ 2 Tempe AZ AZ 85281 responsible for data requirement and insight generation for the commercial banking customer
- Able to work independently
-PL/SQL
-Knowledge on Tableau,Job Description
Data Analyst - SQL

Modis is currently seeking a Data Analyst (not a Data Engineer or Scientist) with strong SQL experience. Our client is seeking a passionate individual for a permanent hire role. This is an exciting opportunity to work on a diverse range of projects with one of the industry's fastest growing companies. Please apply or email me directly if you feel you are the individual we are looking for.

Position Responsibilities
Review and validate customer data as it is collected
Oversee the deployment of data to the data warehouse
Will be utilizing SQL on a frequent basis
Develop policies and procedures for the collection and analysis of data
Create or discover new data procurement and processing programs
Cooperate with our IT department to deploy software and hardware upgrades that make it possible for us to leverage big data use cases
Monitor analytics and metrics results
Implement data analysis methodologies
Review customer files to ensure integrity of data collection and utilization
Perform data profiling to identify and understand anomalies
Qualifications
Bachelor’s Degree is required
3+ years’ experience in a Data Analyst role
Strong background using SQL
Experience in customer care analytics is a big plus
Ability to understand and find appropriate applications for data and analysis results
If you feel that you are a good fit for this job please apply through the link or email your resume to andrew.cooper@modis.com.,Gatestone & Co. is looking for an efficient, detail-oriented Data Analyst. The Data Analyst will be responsible for facilitating the issuance of letters and digital communications to consumers, in accordance to regulatory and client expectations.

Our ideal candidate is self-motivated and produces high-quality work. They are able to prioritize tasks appropriately and effectively, and handle multiple tasks at once, while maintaining strong follow-up skills to ensure all responsibilities are handled.

In this role you will:
Complete service requests as it relates to the creation of new letters and digital communications
Perform daily tasks relating to quality control and data validation
Demonstrate accuracy and thoroughness; look for ways to improve and promote quality; apply feedback to improve performance; monitor own work to ensure quality
Assist the Compliance Manager in the development of an effective record keeping system, including letter approvals, letter log, and inventory and regulatory requirements
Import/export data from text format into Excel and vice versa, while maintaining field-level integrity and data accuracy
Work closely with IT and other departments in regards to letter status, communications to consumers, etc.
Other duties as assigned
Skills Required:
An analytical thinker, able to synthesize complex or diverse information, collect and research data, use intuition and experience to complement data; able to manage specialized work efficiently with confidence and competence
A problem solver who identifies and resolves problems in a timely manner; gathers and analyzes information skillfully, uses reason even when dealing with emotional topics
Ability to read, analyze, and interpret corporate, compliance, and legal documentation, as needed
Detail oriented, well organized and has proven ability to work within stringent time frames
Excellent verbal, written, listening, and interpersonal skills
Efficient with troubleshooting
Familiarity with ticketing systems
Qualifications:
2+ years in an administrative role
Proficient with Microsoft Office suite
Knowledge of AS400 is required
Ability to pass a background check and drug screen
High school diploma or GED is required
Who We Are

Founded in 1926, Gatestone is an industry leader providing exceptional outsourced Customer Contact Center and Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) solutions to the world’s most respected organizations. Our clients are some of the world’s most respected organizations including Fortune 500 companies.

Started by Nicholas Wilson from humble beginnings, Gatestone has grown into a major global outsource provider with 10 fully-integrated sites located across North America, Latin American, Central America and Asia offering skill sets across multiple experience levels and languages. Still under original ownership, the company is supported by a long-tenured management team who provide unparalleled strategic leadership at all levels throughout the organization.

Benefits of Working at Gatestone

At Gatestone, we understand that our corporate success starts by attracting the right people, developing and mentoring those that show potential and taking steps to retain and promote our top performers.

We believe in our employees and invest in providing the best growth opportunities. Promotions at Gatestone are based on merit, past performance, and leadership potential. We recognize our top employees and help them succeed. We also have a full time Employee Engagement Specialist who ensures we have fun while working hard!

When you join Gatestone, you do more than join a company. You become part of a team of talented and self- driven individuals dedicated to bring success to the Company and their lives.

Be a part of an Awarding Winning Company.

Check us out in Instagram to see how much fun the Gatestone experience really is!

https://www.instagram.com/gatestonebpo

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $14.50 per hour

Benefits:
Dental Insurance
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Paid Time Off
Vision Insurance
Schedule:
8 Hour Shift
Monday to Friday
Experience:
Administrative: 2 years (Required)
Call Center: 2 years (Required)
As400: 2 years (Required)
Education:
Associate (Required)
Location:
Phoenix, AZ 85004 (Required)
Benefit Conditions:
Waiting period may apply
Only full-time employees eligible
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Title: Data Reporting Analyst
Location: Phoenix, AZ 85016
Rate: DOE
Duration: 6+ month contract
A. Overall Purpose Of The Job (Brief description of the primary purpose of this position)
The Digital Data Analyst is responsible for performing accurate, relevant analysis of information related to digital products, including utilization and other descriptive metrics. The Digital Analyst is responsible for ensuring reports, analysis and dashboards are shared with stakeholders, using tools such as Google Analytics, or data stored in internal databases to surface these insights. The surfaced data will enable teams to monitor relevant KPI information in support of strategic aims. The Digital Data Analyst will help establish a framework and tools for improved digital data collection, tracking, reporting, and integration with other data sources.
B. Key Responsibilities (Critical responsibilities and skills of this position, listed in order of importance)
Design complex Ad-hoc reports, queries and dashboards, according to internal requests
Analyze and improve existing digital analysis tool functionality
Serve as subject matter expert on digital insights data
Participate in reviewing and verification of presented business requirements
Provide objective and transparent analysis of digital data, using proven methodologies to identify areas for improvement and opportunities for investment
Work closely with internal stakeholders to identify insight needs and requirements gathering
Create dashboards, reports, ad hoc queries and analysis for endusers
Produce detailed reports identifying key trends and patterns, interpreting the data into practical and useful recommendations to support strategic objectives.
Advanced understanding of digital analysis tools, such as but not limited to Google Analytics, with the ability to explain technical complexities to non-technical colleagues.
Work with colleagues to ensure that tests and tracking are configured correctly for reporting and optimisation
Troubleshoot complex issues and making recommendations for development

C. Job Profile
Required Skills and Knowledge (Brief description of technical knowledge or skills needed to perform the job)
Experience working with digital analysis tools
Ability to create dashboards and reports using various business intelligence toolsets, such as PowerBI, WebFOCUS, Crystal Reports/Business Objects, Tableau, etc.
Ability to use a methodology and process for requirements gathering and development
Strong written & oral communication skills
Experience with digital analytics tools such as Google Analytics, Adobe and Mix Panel
Task management and ability to effectively manage multiple high priority projects
Strong ability to work across departmental teams
Results driven
Experience working with data loads and transformation.
Provide expertise in analysis, design and creation of complex reports and problem resolution.
Extensive experience with setup, testing, documentation, end-user analysis and report design specifications.
SQL skills and ability to develop SQL scripts and queries using T-SQL on MSSQL Server
Required Work Experience (Brief description of the job-related experience needed to perform the job)
3+ years of experience in digital analysis tools
3+ years developing data intensive reports and insights tracking capabilities using tools such as WebFOCUS, Crystal/Business objects, or PowerBI
2+ years of experience working with ETL process, data loads and transformation
2+ years of experience with SQL desired
Required Qualifications (Brief description of the educational background needed to perform the job)
BA or higher
Degree in computer science or related discipline preferred
If qualified and interested, please send your most current resume as a word document to Jason Weinstein at jason.weinstein@mondo.com,Do you have a passion for data and solving complex problems? Now is the time to
join a nationally known data driven company that is growing their team and
seeking a Senior Data Analystto join their team with focus on machine learning
and AI!

In this Senior Data Analystrole, primary responsibilities include:
Ability to work hands on with large, complex data sets and solve
difficult, non-routine analysis problems, applying advanced analytical
methods as needed.
Possess experience in advanced analytics areas like deep learning and
complex statistical data analysis
Make business recommendations based on data with effective presentations
of findings, visual displays of quantitative information to stakeholders
Develop analysis, forecasting and optimization methods/models to provide
business insights and solutions to key stakeholders; applies
methodologies to future strategic decisions
versees the activities of the junior data analysts
Strong ability to handle multiple simultaneous tasks, prioritize work,
and remain functional under pressure, and aggressive timelines.

Qualifications:
Master s degree in a quantitative discipline or related data analyt
area required, PLUS
5 years of industry experience as a Business/Data Analyst AND 3-5 years
of experience in an advanced data analysis role using tools such as SQL
Strong understanding of Scripting experience in (Python, Perl,
JavaScript, Shell)
Practical knowledge of data in various forms (data warehouses/SQL,
unstructured data environments/PIG, HIVE, Impala)
Strong working knowledge with BI reporting tools (i.e. Tableau, Business
Objects. MicroStrategy is preferred or any other data visualization tool)
Experience in quantitative analysis and statistical modelling
Must be authorized to work in the United States without restrictions or
the need of sponsorship.

For immediate consideration email your most resume to .,Title: Business Data Analyst - I

Location: Tempe-AZ

Duration: 8+ Months Contract

Local Candidate Only W2 Candidate No C2C/Third Party

Description:

The Business Applications and Data Support Analyst within Information Technology supports change and problem management, application and configuration management and production support of our suite of business applications and customer web sites ensuring that the systems and data are accurate and available in a 24x7-operating environment. This job requires gaining a strong working knowledge of business applications as well as a strong understanding of how business users could utilize or adapt the software to support their areas of responsibility. This is a hands on position requiring both leadership and technical problem solving skills. 1 to 5 years of experience.

JOB DUTIES:

Review data to ensure accuracy and completeness of data

Review audit trails on computer systems used to acquire and process data

Work closely with internal teams to identify and recommend areas for data analytics

Organized with the ability to work on multiple tasks concurrently

Verify and maintain data integrity upon completion of audit

MUST HAVE SKILLS:

Strong Excel skills (Formulas, Pivot Tables, VLOOKUP)

Experienced with data management systems

Have strong attention to detail and prioritize tasks

Work with team and independently as task requires

DESIRED SKILLS:

Telecom systems experience, SiteTraker, and Granite knowledge a plus

EDUCATION/CERTIFICATIONS:

Minimum High School Graduate.

College Degree a plus

Thank You,

Rohan Ghag
Recruitment Lead
Avacend, Inc.
3155 North Point Pkwy Bldg. G
Suite 130, Alpharetta GA 30005
Phone: 678-935-7308

Rohan.g@avacend.com

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Tempe, US-AZ,responsible for data requirement and insight generation for the commercial banking customer
- Able to work independently
-PL/SQL
-Knowledge on Tableau,The Financial Data Analyst is responsible for providing accurate, complete and meaningful reports and analysis used for business management and decision making. The Senior Data Analyst works closely with department and/or functional managers to determine report requirements, build reports, and quality test them prior to distribution. The Senior Data Analyst also provides support with project management services for large data projects.

Essential Job Functions
• Develops and deploys reporting and analysis that is accurate, complete and properly summarized to aid in management of business and management decision making. Responsible for extracting and summarizing data from JDE and other corporate systems.
• Has expert knowledge of JDE tables and field usage. Has thorough knowledge of other corporate software, programs and data tools. Assists managers with report design and development. Tests reports and ensures that they perform as expected.
• Understands flow of data internally and in relation to the General Ledger.
• Produces weekly, monthly, and quarterly trend and activity reports as well as other operational and management reports. Ensures that reports are produced per scheduled timelines for review by functional management teams.
• Analyzes large amounts of data and investigates and researches anomalies. Works with department and/or functional teams to correct issues when identified.
• Works with IT Business Intelligence team to design, test and deploy MRE reports for general usage.
• Provides support to management to produce reports and analyze large amounts of data as part of acquisitions or other special projects.
• Produces ad-hoc reporting as assigned.

TekCom Resources, Inc. is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer and values diversity. All employment is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and business need. We are compliant with the Fair Chance Ordinance as applicable, and will consider all qualified applications for employment.,Accounting Data Analyst
Phoenix, Arizona, United States

Key
* Accounting/Finance/Business reporting and analysis experience
* working with Accounting/Finance/Business end users
* Excellent PC skills advanced Excel functions
* ERP - Nice to Have
Ajay Sharma
Sr. Recruiter
T: Ext: 2111
Cell:

Show moreShow less,SQL/SAS Data Analyst:Signature Consultants has an opportunity for a SQL/SAS Data Analyst. Our client's Customer Remediation Center of Excellence team provides data to support remediations for harmed customers. The team works closely with auto lending subject matter experts, remediation leads, data quality experts, and other team members. The team is passionate about providing the best quality data possible to best remediate harmed customers. The team is serious about all of the things that should be taken seriously when remediating harmed customers, such as finding all of the customer harm and ensuring that every single customer is remediated accurately to the last penny. As a Data Analyst supporting Customer Remediations, you will dig deep into data sources and find the customer harm. You will write documentation, query data, and provide final data populations which support specific customer remediations.

Qualifications:

• 4+ years of coding experience (preferably in SQL although other languages will be considered)
• Extensive knowledge and understanding of research and analysis
• Strong analytical skills with high attention to detail and accuracy
• Excellent verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills

Ideal Resource:

• Loves working with data
• Hates repetitive, mundane, tedious work to such a degree that automation is the only way to go
• Strong in coding in one or more of the following: Python, SAS, SQL.
• Creative in solving problems, especially thinking outside-the-box to come up with solutions
• Has the flexibility to follow team procedures, yet also has the courage to suggest improvements
• Is an excellent juggler, especially if you can keep cool under pressure while multi-tasking
• Really enjoys working closely as part of a team and has the people skills to do that well
• Can accept feedback without taking it personally (knows when and when not to push back)

About Signature Consultants, LLC

Headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Signature Consultants was established in 1997 with a singular focus: to provide clients and consultants with superior staffing solutions. For the ninth consecutive year, Signature was voted as one of the "Best Staffing Firms to Work For" and is now the 14th largest IT staffing firm in the United States (source: Staffing Industry Analysts). With 28 locations throughout North America, Signature annually deploys thousands of consultants to support, run, and manage their clients' technology needs. Signature offers IT staffing, consulting, managed solutions, and direct placement services. For more information on the company, please visit www.sigconsult.com. Signature Consultants is the parent company to Hunter Hollis and Madison Gunn.

Job Requirements:,Location Tempe, AZ Description Our client is currently seeking a Data Analyst - Mid-Level. Candidates should be LOCAL. For immediate consideration please email copy of current resume to Amanda at ajauriguejudge.com. This job will have the following responsibilities Perform physical andor logical data modeling and analysis. Will develop dashboards to track remediation of issues. Required to have strong statistics and data analysis background. Ability to work in a fast-paced, technical, cross-functional environment and be able to produce with minimal direction. Excellent written and verbal communication skills. Qualifications Requirements Data modeling tools, Python, Informatics, Collibra. Data Analysis Experience- A Must Contact ajauriguejudge.com mailtoajauriguejudge.com?subjectData20Analyst20-20Mid-Level This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com httpwww.judge.com,Job TitleInformation Security Data Analyst Location Job Description Information Security Data and Reporting Analyst Location Glendale, AZ Overall 10+ years' experience The Information Security Data Analyst is responsible for safeguarding organizational information assets through data analysis, and development and maintenance of metrics to measure the effectiveness of the information security function. This position will produce reporting through data analysis to come up with actionable items to help Management make informed data-based decisions. Essential Duties and Responsibilities Uses a combination of software tools, statistical analysis, critical thinking, programming andor scripting, and web research to analyze large, complex sets of data related to Information Security data, including vulnerability and compliance scans. Conducts routine and ad hoc data extraction, analysis, charting, and reporting to inform data-based decision making for management. Extracts integrates information security data from multiple sources to produce requested or required data elements and analyses. Identifies analyzes and interprets trends, patterns, and outliers in complex data. Quantifies the impact and assesses the severity of data issues. Proposes and assists in the development of innovative ways of presenting complex data and metrics. Partners with business and functional units to create and maintain the info security metrics. CreatesMaintains vulnerability scans, and then analyze data and integrate into reporting and dashboard creation. Proven ability to successfully partner with internal clients and vendors to align strategy with deliverables, identify business challenges and develop alternatives to mitigate. Job Specifications Expert in Information Security Data Analytics. Hands-on Experience in working in a Data warehouse environment. Experience with SQLPLSQL and DataMart concepts. Strong knowledge of analytical, data reporting tools techniques, prioritizing and problem-solving skills. Strong written, oral, and interpersonal communication skills. Ability to present ideas in user-friendly language to a variety of constituent audiences. Domain Knowledge of Insurance - (Property and Casualty) along with Information Security. Ability to develop positive and collaborative relationships with business partners and effectively communicate with both business and technology data stakeholders. Capture, develop, and document data definitions, business rules, and data quality requirements Worked on Security system analysis, development, and database analysis Create reports and data-driven presentations with impact. Identify trends and occurrences in data and translate findings into various mediums, including text, charts, graphs, displays and tables. Interpret data, analyze results, and provide insights for creating Metrics and Dashboard Wireframes. Develop reports and deliverables for management. Identify and define data quality and reporting improvements. Contact, Nathaniel jayakumar Recruiter ICST The castle (lower level), Brick hill Ave, Suite C South Portland, ME 04106 Phone 207-221-2634 email njayakumari-cst.com Web www.i-cst.com,RESPONSIBILITIES:

A Kforce client is seeking a Data Analyst for a project in either Chandler AZ, Des Moines IA or San Antonio TX. This resource should be have a strong SQL background able to build complex queries. Needs to be able to not only write effective analytic code, but also able to translate those findings into easy to consume technical docs and reports for non-technical end users.

Start your career off on the right foot with one of 'America's Top 500 Companies', as awarded by Forbes. Our client is known as a place where people feel included, valued, supported and respected. Innovative thinking and industry-leading technology allow their associates to thrive and grow in their careers. And with a priority placed on their culture and company principles, their commitment to diversity, ethics and the communities in which they operate is their driving force.

REQUIREMENTS:
5+ years of complex SQL coding experience
Extensive analytical experience using SAS
Creative in solving problems, especially thinking outside-the-box to come up with solutions
Has the flexibility to follow team procedures, yet also has the courage to suggest improvements
Is an excellent juggler, especially if you can keep cool under pressure while multi-tasking
Really enjoys working closely as part of a team and has the people skills to do that well
Work efficiently against tight deadlines
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,The Data Analyst Senior is responsible for providing accurate, complete and meaningful reports and analysis of financial information used for business management and decision making. The Senior Data Analyst works closely with Fiber department and/or functional managers to determine report requirements, build reports, and quality test financial results prior to distribution. The Senior Data Analyst also provides support with project management services for large data projects. Essential Job Functions • Develops and deploys reporting and analysis that is accurate, complete and properly summarized to aid in management of business and management decision making. Responsible for extracting and summarizing data from Oracle and other corporate systems. • Has expert knowledge of Oracle tables and field usage. Has thorough knowledge of other corporate software, programs and data tools. Assists managers with report design and development. Tests reports and ensures that they perform as expected. • Understands flow of data internally and in relation to the General Ledger. • Produces weekly, monthly, and quarterly trend and activity reports as well as other operational and management reports. Ensures that reports are produced per scheduled timelines for review by functional management teams. • Analyzes large amounts of data and investigates and researches anomalies. Works with department and/or functional teams to correct issues when identified. • Works with IT Business Intelligence team to design, test and deploy MRE reports for general usage. • Provides support to management to produce reports and analyze large amounts of data as part of acquisitions or other special projects. • Produces ad-hoc reporting as assigned. Education/Certifications • Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent experience in Business, Accounting, Finance or related field Experience/Minimum Requirements • Five (5) years Accounting/Finance/Business reporting and analysis experience • Experience working with Accounting/Finance/Business end users Other Skills/Abilities • Excellent PC skills -advanced Excel functions • Excellent communication and interpersonal skills • Ability to summarize large amounts of complex data into management reports • Knowledge of Oracle and other data analysis and financial software and tools • Ability to problem solve to determine root causes of anomalies • Understand and write reports using various software and tools • Ability to manage multiple projects and priorities • Responds well under pressure with deadlines Working Conditions: Works in a normal office setting with no exposure to adverse environmental conditions. *** Dear Suppliers, the manager would like to see the following in the candidates that get submitted to this requisition: - Accounting and Data Analytic background - 4+ years of schooling (Accounting will need to be part of this request) Dear suppliers, please read the description carefully. The manager would like to see candidates that have a Financial Analysis background. Must have heavy Excel experience and also have the ability of analyzing data in a quick manner. Must have extensive Excel experience working with v-lookups, formulas, etc.... The supplier bill rate is: $45 an hour. Please do not submit past $45 an hour.,Job Title: (Data Analyst) BA/BSA
Job Location: Mesa, AZ
Job Type: Contract / Full-Time

Responsibilities:
This is the position requires Tableau experience.

About us:
Founded in 2007, InterSources Inc is a Small Business Enterprise (SBE), Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) & Women-Owned Small Business (WOSB) Certified Company specializing in providing IT Consulting, IT Staffing Solutions, and Software solutions. We have been recipients of Various Awards under "Fastest Growing IT Consulting and Software Company " and "Excellence in Technology Services ",Job Description
Card Data Analyst

HIGHLIGHTS
Location: Tempe, AZ
Position Type: Direct Hire
Hourly / Salary: BOE
Residency Status: US Citizen or Green Card Holder ONLY
ONSITE ONLY

Our client is look for a Card Data Analyst to join their team!

Job Description

The core responsibilities of this position are to conduct the data / reporting analytics for underwriting the bank commercial cards and managing the portfolio efficiently: score card / risk model development to predict commercial card performance; automation enhancement for credit decisioning and execution; proper and timely data reports of portfolio management. Key to this role is the ability to creatively develop dashboard and tools to enhance automation and reporting through leveraging the current banking data and expanding the data sources /analytics, monitor the BCC card portfolio performance timely to mitigate the portfolio credit risk while helping drive card revenue growth.

Qualifications

This individual will apply industry knowledge and subject matter expertise to effectively perform the following:
Provide in-depth credit worthiness assessment on business credit card portfolio through developing score card, risk model and algorithms to predict commercial card performance.
Data analytics and symmetrical review to enhance the automation capability / procedure of our card offer underwriting / portfolio management
Monitor both the business credit card portfolios’ credit improvement /deterioration to take risk action proactively. Provide meaningful data analytics on card fraud management and timely execution
Work with all business partners (IT, vendors, Data Analytics Team) to build, maintain card dashboard
Expectations
The role is expected to conduct commercial data daily analytics and is expected to operate independently within the oversight of the Card Product Analytics Directors.
Data management, commercial card credit analysis and excellent communication skills are required to be successful in this role.
This individual will also need to develop strong internal relationships and work closely in partnership with IT, Data Analytics, Credit Administration, Card Product, and Payment Operation.
The right individual will have both influence and exposure to the Credit and Payment Leadership Team.
The position requires deep expertise in data analytics of commercial loan portfolio management, particularly over small business credit card portfolios.
Experience in underwriting / managing business credit card portfolio is a plus.
Understanding the venture capital / start up ecosystem is a plus.
BS/BA Degree in Finance, Accounting, Statistics, Math or Economics with 3+ year direct work experience in data analytics on commercial card portfolio.
Demonstrated expertise in commercial credit data management and reporting are required. Master’ s degree is a plus.
Prefer deep experience on data management in deferent data systems, especially commercial card systems (FD, TSYS, etc.)
Demonstrated proficiency working with computers and Microsoft Office applications (specifically, Outlook, Excel, Visio, Word, and PowerPoint).
"We are GTN – The Go To Network",Title: Data Analyst (Jr to Mid Level)
Location: 100% remote right now, onsite down the line
Duration: Direct Hire Position
Interview Process: Phone Interview + Webex Interview
* Can not provide sponsorship, can not work C2C **
Must haves:
3-5 years w/ SQL
Tableau
Working within SFDC
Position Summary:
Major responsibilities include development, design, and production support of SQL Server database objects. This individual must be a self-starter with excellent communication skills, able to think on their own with limited structure and supervision. Core areas of focus include stored procedure creation, ETL, server performance, database process design, and data analysis.

Responsibilities:
· Microsoft SQL Server 2012/2017/2019 databases
· Manage client communications & requirements gathering
· Data extraction, query & API development across a broad variety of platforms including Microsoft, Google, Salesforce and other 3rd party providers
· SQL Server code development (Adhoc and production)
· Create and manage SSIS packages
· Monitor and troubleshoot ETL jobs daily using BCP, DTSRUN, SSIS and other tools
· Assist with troubleshooting and root cause analysis
· Manage and maintain database changes in Development, QA, Staging and Production
· Ability to perform ad-hoc analysis and quickly adapt to changes
· Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills.
· Exceptional oral, written and customer service skills.

Experience & Qualifications:
· Experience with a variety of data structures and API's including Google Analytics & BigQuery
· Tableau and/or SSRS experience
· Salesforce Experience
· Knowledge derived from experiences with more complex database systems.
· Ability to work in a small, dynamic, collaborative team environment
· Must be an independent thinker and can work with limited supervision
· Support a risk and compliance culture
· BS/BA Degree
· 3+ years relevant database experience.,Title: SQL Data Analyst
Duration: 6+ Month Contract
Location: Dallas, TX
Rate: Competitive

Required Skills:
2+ years of experience with reporting and analytics development experience including: dashboards, scorecards, crosstabs, and operational reporting
2+ years of experience in the development of analytical models
Intermediate to advanced knowledge of SQL
Knowledge of one or more reporting / data visualization tools such as PowerBI, Tableau, Qlik View, etc. Previous Power BI experience in an Enterprise setting is required.
Ability to manage key stakeholder expectations and concerns, and to identify and mitigate project risk as required, both in person and virtually
Attention to detail and passion for delivering outstanding service
Ability to multi-task and work independently as well as part of a team; self-motivated
Ability to coordinate delivery of work activities
Ability to communicate ideas both verbally and in writing to influence others using on-on-one contact, formal presentations, and group discussions
Demonstrated capacity to thrive in a high-change, often ambiguous business environment,Location Camden, NJ Salary 50 Description Our client is currently seeking a Data Analyst Someone with a food science product development background is most preferred. Will be trained on Optiva strong data accuracy, strong in Excel Will work remote and manager and manager wants someone to be in the EST or CST timezones only. The work hours are Mon-Fri 9am-5pm This is a non-IT technical role within the Campbell Americas RD Product Data Management (PDM) group leading the product document translation for finished product commercialization and quality initiatives, managing critical product formulation information as it is transferred from the kitchen to the manufacturing facility. This position establishes and documents technical standards related to product formulation management for successful scale up and manufacture. Team members in this role are also responsible for technical documentation in systems such as the Optiva Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) system, SharePoint, and an Electronic Notebook system. Working in close collaboration with internal subject matter experts in Product Development, Packaging, Quality, Regulatory Affairs, Supply Chain and Nutrition. Projects are of moderate to high complexity and technical risk. Apply food sciencetechnical knowledge to translate Product Development kitchen batch formulations to plant-ready formatted formulations, using a set of standards dictated by type of formula (e.g. retort soup, aseptic broth, hot fill beverage), specific manufacturing location requirements and unitized plant operations. - Systematic build of formulas, procedures and specifications in the Optiva Product Lifecycle Management system as required to ensure that products can be manufactured properly and according to specifications and can integrate with SAP RMS plant floor systems. - Work collaboratively as a core member of multiple product commercialization business teams, independently managing all product documentation requirements as needed to meet project timelines. - Ensure all technical documentation is bundled to deliver the full manufacturing requirements formula, procedure, kitchen batch sheet, formula change notes, cost and extend SAP requirements, item specifications and some packaging requirements. Minimum education required BS Degree in a Science based field, Computer Science acceptable - Years of relevant experience 2-3 years - Excellent written and verbal technical communication skills, along with strong collaboration skills. - Demonstrate analytical thinking, problem solving and decision-making skills. - Proficient at independent planning and prioritization. - Strong computer skills including fluency in Microsoft Office (especially Excel), and database management. Ability to quickly become proficient in all relevant software systemsapplications such as Optiva PLM and SharePoint. Contact kzywalewskijudge.com mailtokzywalewskijudge.com?subjectData20Analyst20 This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com httpwww.judge.com,Job Description


Job #: 1076450

Role: Systems Analyst

Location: Philadelphia, PA

Duties:
Analyze data from a particular business domain and define how best to organize it in support of Group's cloud data architecture runway
Work with stakeholders to understand the domain's functional and data requirements
Work with stakeholders to identify use cases for data consumption
Support Data Architecture by rationalizing redundant data and developing the approach building out the Group cloud data-warehouse and analytics platforms
Support broader architecture teams in defining a business domain's master data management approach
Define and document the Data Lineage for a business domain
Skills:
7+ years of experience working in the Data or Systems Analysis field Strong SQL skills and knowledge of various database types and technologies
Familiarity with relevant data-related AWS services (S3, Athena, Redshift, Glue, etc..)
Knowledge and Experience working in a Scaled Agile Framework
Excellent collaboration and teamwork skills
Excellent written/verbal communications
Education: Bachelors or higher in relevant field

***THIS PERSON MUST BE ABLE TO SIT ON APEX SYSTEMS W-2 WITHOUT SPONSORSHIP***

If interested, send resume to mfetterolf@apexsystems.com

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Title: Data Reporting Analyst
Location: Trevose, PA or Phoenix, AZ
Rate: DOE
Duration: 6 month contract to hire

Job Details:

3 main must haves:
Power BI reporting
SQL - working queries
ReportingBackground on Team/Role:
Day to day responsibilities:
Writing reports for multiple products.
Working with internal analytics for travel data
Migrate reports from legacy databases
Internal and external travel data--reporting
Fast paced, high pressure environment
Several projects going on
Going to market with client facing self serving reports
Legacy data reports (not database managers)
Technical person, experience working in live environments
Branding project happening--someone goes in and change the code--routine effort (Admin reporting)
Power BI is a MUST,Description Robert Half Technology is looking for a Business Analyst in Philadelphia, PA Responsibilities for Business Analyst - Sift through massive amounts of data, pivot tables, trend analytics (Excel) - Reviews and evaluates description of changes to database designs. - Understands impact of database changes and makes recommendations as appropriate. - Interacts with project managers to design appropriate solutions and tactically executes upon design. - Participates in Business Process Modeling sessions, acting as a documentarian, cofacilitator, or subject matter expert in sketch sessions. - Conducts preliminary investigation for all project requests reviews requirements, specifications, tests, support and training plans to ensure they are in line with business objectives on projects. - Develops reports and custom request for users. - Performs system tuning, performance monitoring, and database maintenance. - Develops both technical and end-user documentation. - Assists with development and execution of IT process Requirements - 3-4 years of experience - Expert level with Microsoft Excel (Excel Formulas, Excel VBA) - PMO- Project Management Office experience - JIRA and QlikView knowledge is plus Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.comjobstechnology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer MFDisabilityVeterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use httpswww.roberthalf.comterms-of-use .,Title: Data Strategy Analyst
Location: 100% REMOTE (after Covid in Wilmington, DE, 2 days a week to start off, then 3 remote...down the line 1 day in the office a week)
Duration: 6 Month Contract to Hire - MUST BE A US CITIZEN!!
Start: ASAP
Interview Process: Skype Interview
Must haves:
SAS
SQL
Financial Services
Data Strategy/Analysis
Bachelor's Degree
Job Description:
3+ years of data analysis and strategy
2+ with SAS or SQL (Some people say they have SAS/SQL to move things from one thing to another, needs to be analytical and analyze data in ways that are not obvious)
Tableau (preferred)
Student loans or financial experience
Bachelors
Very analytical
Detail oriented
Good communication skills
Modeling experience within SAS, R or Python) - (Nice to have)
Presenting to clients
Analyzing borrowers data (student loans) and they support servicing call center and collections (ongoing). Optimizing strategy, become more efficient, customer friendly.
Understanding borrower contacts (touch points) and how they interact with customers with different channels (website, letters, emails, calls, etc) and how they can optimize this experience
JOB SUMMARY: Provide a brief executive summary of overall job functions, responsibilities and skill level.

The Sr. Strategy Analyst is responsible for supporting the collections and servicing call center with reporting, strategy enhancements, strategy development, model testing, implementation, validation and other ad hoc analytics. The candidate should be proficient in writing code using analytic tools such as SAS and SQL and be able to provide management with strategic insights using data visualization tools such as Tableau. This analyst will be required to build relationships across the organization as well as within their immediate business area to gain support and increase speed of execution of new strategies. Tasks will include, but are not limited to: reporting and analysis on portfolio trends, performance metrics, strategy performance, development of new business tools, creation of segmentation strategies, etc.

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) prohibits discrimination by employers, in compensation and employment opportunities, against qualified individuals with disabilities who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the "essential functions of a job. A function may be essential for any of several reasons, including: the job exists to perform that function, the employee holding the job was hired for his/her expertise in performing the function, or only a limited number of employees are available to perform that function.

Essential Job Functions % of Time for Each Function

List at least five major functional areas of responsibility (such as Personnel Management, Analysis/Reporting, Project Work, Customer Service, Budgetary Responsibilities, etc.) in descending order of importance. Within each function, specify more basic tasks that compose the function.
Strategy Development 25%
a. Create models and strategies to achieve business goals such as improved collection efforts, increased productivity, improved customer experience, etc.
b. Liaison with operations for strategy development, implementation and post implementation feedback.
c. Monitor strategy performance and communicate results in a timely manner.
Strategic Insights 25%
a. Use data mining techniques to continually search for trends and other insights which might be useful to the business leaders.
b. Apply visualizations so that the end-product is always clear, concise, and user friendly.
Ad Hoc Analysis 25%
a. Respond to requests for data and analytics needed by senior management team.
b. Assist with developing analytics which support operational changes.
Portfolio Analysis 25%
a. Analyze portfolio performance by combination of variables and metrics.
b. Understand the true drivers of operations strategy and decision making.

If qualified and interested, please send your most current resume as a word document to Jason Weinstein at jason.weinstein@mondo.com,: Responsible for designing, modeling, developing and supporting Database Management Systems (DBMS). Analyzes data requirements, application and processing architectures, data dictionaries, and database schema(s), and then designs, develops, amends, optimizes, and certifies database schema design to meet system(s) requirements. Gathers, analyzes, and normalizes relevant information related to, and from business processes, functions, and operations to evaluate data credibility and determine relevance and meaning. Develops database and warehousing designs across multiple platforms and computing environments. Develops an overall data architecture that supports the information needs of the business in a flexible but secure environment.Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Systems, or other related field. Or equivalent work experience. Typically has 3 - 5 years of IT work experience in DBA, DBMS design and support and relevant computing environments.,My direct client in Center City Philadelphia is seeking a Sr. Data Analyst to join their team!

Title: Sr. Data Analyst
Location: Center City Philadelphia
Duration: PERMANENT
Salary: DOE

Must haves:
SQL
Global & enterprise background
Implementations/integrations
MarTech
Data visualization (PowerBI/Tableau, etc)
Notes
SQL Background
5+ years of experience
ERP experience
Integrations
Implementations (walking through them)
Headsdown do'er type role
highly communicative / personality is key
status updates
MarTech background
over communicative
Tableau/PowerBI (or any data visualization tool)
Data link to data visualization
Salesforce -- sales and service cloud (PLUS)
database type person- navigate between databases
magento, salesforce, PIMs, snowflake-- similar products
Coming from enterprise and global background
30/60/90- implementation on PIM, launching a project--snowflake implementation, data warehouse platform
working and guiding those tools
data needs and data issues
data architecture--future integrations, maintenance, data modeling
ground up build-- which they think will be a challenge
omnichannel- digital and offline side of things
salesforce/website -utilizing data
Python/R (Plus)
gradually growing into senior manager/data strategy lead

If you are qualified or interested please send an updated resume to Shaylyn Jaworowski at shaylyn.jaworowski@mondo.com,Piper Companies is looking for an SQL Data Analyst for a financial services firm in the Horsham, PA area.

Responsibilities for the SQL Data Analyst:
Analyze existing application databases to develop source to target mapping for the design of a new enterprise data warehouse
Communicate with business stakeholders to understand data usage across verticals
Qualifications for the SQL Data Analyst:
5+ years of data analysis experience
Expert in SQL querying
Proficient in integrating and transforming business logic into new data models
Expert at source to target mapping
Understand data warehousing concepts - fact tables, dimensions, start schema
Excellent communication skills - provides clear, concise answers to business stakeholders
Knowledge of Microstrategy a plus
Compensation/Benefits for the SQL Data Analyst:
$55-65/hr W2 (12+ month contract), Potential for full-time conversion
Comprehensive benefit package; Medical, Dental, Vision, 401k, and Paid Time Off
Keywords:

sql analyst, sql server developer, etl developer, database developer, senior etl developer, senior sql developer, senior sql engineer, senior database engineer, sql, sql server, ssis, ssrs, ssas, cube, etl, database design, data warehouse, unit testing, Teradata, business objects, informatica, data modeling, star schema, snowflake schema, t-sql, git, svn, devops, benefits, vacation, holiday, 401k,Our Wayne, PA based client is hiring a Data Governance Analyst. This is a full time position with a competitive salary and benefits. Qualified candidates should send their resume (Word Format) along with salary requirements to Harold Miller at hmillergenuent.com As a Data Governance Analyst, you will be responsible for managing processes and reporting deliverables supporting Risk Management, Audit, Operations, and Basel Compliancy for the Reporting Analysis Center of Excellence team. The analyst will be asked to liaise directly and independently with various functions in the organization to support Data Management and Governance initiatives. The analyst will also be asked to provide data and business analysis skills, on a daily basis, to support data projects. Provide Overall Support to Data Management, Business Intelligence, and Data Governance processes for entire U.S. portfolio Data Quality and Analysis Tasks for US Portfolio Administer and support Data Quality issue remediation tracking for U.S. Portfolio. Support development of US Data Quality remediation monitoring and prevention process and implementation. Develop and enforce data policies and process improvements to support data integrity. Support the Global Data Warehouse and Governance processes by providing analysis of contract-level risk, finance, and liquidity data points for data quality improvement and new data extract development. Utilize SQL, Excel, and Qlik to validate, test, and perform analysis on data feeds for regulatory reporting on a daily basis. Data Governance and Business Analysis Tasks for US Portfolio Enhance data governance awareness and communication through U.S. Organization. Leverage business analysis abilities to translate business and technical requirements into usable documentation to support data governance initiatives. Utilize Visio skills to document data lineage, architecture, and business processes to support Data Governance and Management initiatives. Support organizational adherence and commitment to processes and procedures outlined in the Target Operating Model for the Data Management Business Intelligence Basel Compliancy effort. Profile 3 + years of experience specific to the Financial Services and more specifically the Leasing industry is preferred Bachelor's degree required 3 + years data analysis experience is preferred Ability to build partnerships with members from a variety of disciplines to achieve mutually agreed upon outcomes focused on improving future processes Experience with Federal Reserve or any other mandatory banking requirements preferred Any experience with Finance and Accounting procedures is preferred Strong technical abilities preferred to liaise with IT to articulate, modify and approve technical project requirements Experience validating data independently to arrive at actionable conclusions Ability to manage multiple deliverables to achieve agreed upon deadlines Strong analytical, organization, and communication skills,To continue our growth path, we need a Data Analyst who thrives working with large data sets to create & analyze reports & prove out multiple scenarios that support business decisions across all areas of the business. This is a highly impactful role as you’ll work across every step of the analytics process from problem identification, data gathering, and data cleansing, to developing thoughtful analysis and making presentation of findings.
The Turn5 business is built on using data – not opinions – to guide the path forward. Turn5 boasts industry leading business strategies. Those strategies come from smart people armed with the right data and analysts to challenge their thinking, provide insights & pounce on opportunities.
You will be challenged to work collaboratively across all departments to spread the use of data and knowledge to make better decisions throughout the company. One minute you might be using custom SQL code to build reports that help analyze a new data set, the next minute collaborating with our department leads to analyze KPI reports, and the next minute partnering with your peers to gather, cleanse and move data to maintain integrity. Regardless of the task, it’s critical you have strong situational awareness and EQ as you’ll work with diverse stakeholders across the organization.
If your passionate about data & analysis and want to work with people who believe in the power of analysis, join us!

Responsibilities
Year 1 is going to be about:
Discovering opportunities for improvement and provide recommendations for improvement within Turn5's strategy to drive incremental operational success
Working with team of Data Engineers to ensure performance reliability of dashboards and visualizations available via Tableau Server
Using custom SQL to improve data structure, optimize/automate data flow, and build custom reports
Collaborating with representatives from across Turn5's departments to contribute to analytics and data integration projects
Performing ad-hoc reporting analysis for all Turn5 business functions
Performing ad-hoc analysis to help predict performance or to assist future decisions
Managing our analytics project and ticketing system, ensuring the highest impact projects are prioritized and ensuring quality scoping of projects
Being presented with business problems and doing any required aspects (data identification, data cleansing, data movement, analysis, etc.) to figure out the cause and how to improve performance

Qualifications
We can’t skip over some of the specific skills and experience we know are a “must” to be successful. So, we need you to have:
BA/BS in IT, marketing, e-commerce, economics, mathematics, or other related degrees & at minimum 1-2 years of experience working in a similar capacity
BA/BS degree requirement can be substituted for 3+ years of related work experience
Excellent analytical skills: including being able to quality-assure, clean, and analyze large data sets to draw conclusions and propose recommendations
6 months - 2 years of experience with MS SQL Server 2012+
Comfortable with implementing basic statements for DDL (SELECT, INSERT, DELETE & MERGE).
6 months - 2 years of experience working in/moving data from Tableau, Google Analytics, or any other analytics platforms
Data centric experience working with various applications (OMS, WMS, etc.) implemented within an eCommerce setting would be a plus
Proficiency in Excel,Business Analyst/Data Analyst

ICS is working with a Fortune 500, industry leading financial institution in Wilmington, DE, currently looking for a BA/Data Analyst. You will become an asset to the company since they expect to convert candidates within 8-12 months. Can you picture yourself working for one of America's Ideal Employers? Our client has received numerous awards and accolades due in part to their commitment to diversity, veterans, and fostering innovation. They've been named one of Fortune Magazine's World's Most Admired Companies of 2018 and are included in the Top 50 Most Innovative Companies named by Boston Consulting Group. With on-site training and mentoring, they are committed to your professional development as well.

Responsibilities Include:

Serve as a liaison between Finance technology and Product Owners.
Assist in developing requirements, strategy, scope and priorities.
Analyze and document business/data requirements and produce detailed functional specifications and data lineage.
Conduct data analysis and assist with data modeling
Analyze and document process flows and develop target state processes.
Provide technical and functional support throughout the project lifecycle.
Work with the development team to facilitate the development effort (e.g. ensuring development teams' understanding of the specifications).
Develop use stories, and partner with the business to ensure sign-off on all requirements, testing and implementation
Develop and mock-up user interfaces and reports
Facilitate implementation of new functionality through training sessions, demonstrations, and the development of appropriate documentatio
Background working in financial service
Strong SQL background
Agile background and experience running Agile sessions
Experience with Data profiling, data analytics, and working with DRD (data requirement docs),Data AnalystKey responsibilities for the Data Analyst include:
• Writing complex SQL queries that analyze source data to understand relationships within the data
• Write SQL queries to perform data profiling to better understand the data contained within the systems
• Create source-to-target mappings that capture business logic, data standardization rules, and data integration logic that can be used by the ETL team.
• Identifying and interpreting patterns within data
• Work closely with business partners to resolve data discrepancies, explain data findings, and garner final approval of the source-to-target mappings
• Work closely with the data modelers, data engineers, and QA team to ensure that the data is properly loaded into the data warehouse
About You
Ideal characteristics in a candidate include:
• Exceptional analytical skills
• Strong oral and written communications skills,
• Meticulous and detail-oriented
• Must be a problem solver, critical thinker, self-motivated and possess integrity and a strong work ethic
• Ability to work independently on concurrent tasks and adhere to deadlines
• Ability to easily adapt to changing priorities
• Ability to meet high expectations for precision and accuracy
• High degree of initiative and intellectual curiosity

Required qualifications from an ideal candidate are:
• 3+ years' experience performing data analysis in a data warehouse, data mart, or business intelligence environment
• Deep knowledge of database structures, normalization, de-normalization and entity relationships
• Deep knowledge of data warehouse concepts
• Strong data manipulation and data analysis skills
• Advanced Excel skills are preferred to ensure repetitive tasks can be completed in an efficient manner
• Ability to work both independently as well as a team
• Ability to communicate highly technical concepts in business terms
• Experience working in an Agile environment
• Experience in a financial services industry preferred

For more information please contact Brian Otten at 203-433-7817 or botten@itechsolutions.com

Since 1995, iTech Solutions Inc., has been providing IT Consulting and Direct Hire Services to the Insurance, Financial, Communications, Manufacturing and Government sectors with local offices in Connecticut, Minnesota, Colorado, Massachusetts, Tennessee, North Carolina, and New Jersey / Pennsylvania area.

Our recruiting strategy is simple, if you want to find qualified IT professionals then use IT professionals to find them. So at iTech Solutions, our personnel are all career IT professionals with a wide range of IT experience. We can honestly say our staff understands the technologies, the complexities of finding and selecting the appropriate personnel and the pressures of running successful IT projects.

Employer will not sponsor applicants for any employment visas, at hiring or in the future, including but not limited to H-1B visas. Corp-to-Corp or subcontract personnel will not be considered for this position.

Job Requirements:,Job Description

McGrath Systems is accepting applications for a Sales Data Analyst in the Berwyn, PA area.

Job Description:
Sales Compensation Administration:
Upload and reconcile all data into Sales Management Software
Sales Management Software administration
Answer questions from field
Subject matter expert on current compensation plan
Sales Analytics and Build
Create methodology and spreadsheet to build quotas
Analyze historic commissions results including percent to quota
Model future compensation plans
Sunshine Compliance
Review and audit T&E to ensure Sunshine Compliance, communicate with sales force when appropriate
Create and file report regarding Sunshine Compliance
Other Duties as needed or required, including data entry. Dynamics support, and ad hoc reporting

Knowledge, Skill, and Abilities:
Excellent attention to detail and organizational skills
Proficiency skill level in excel
Professional communication to field

Education and Experience:
Bachelor’ s Degree in Economics, Accounting or Finance
1-3 years experience in financial analysis, accounting and/or sales compensation

For immediate consideration email resume to nevans@mcgrathsystems.com or call 215-278-8746

McGrath Systems is an Equal Opportunity Employer and embraces diversity in the workplace.,RESPONSIBILITIES Provide exploratory analysis to understand data elements/ correctness data domain

Develop sample KPI(TM)s for both product and quality and demo to multiple stakeholders

Build domain knowledge on various areas such as IP Video, HSD, xFi, etc.,

Capture and document requirements using interviews, document analysis, requirements workshops, business process descriptions, task and workflow analysis

Work with developers and SME's to establish roadmaps for data streams

Help prioritize data engineering needs for syndicated partners

Evaluate information gathered from multiple sources, and reconcile conflicts and develop recommendations to change procedures based on learnings

Work with internal and external customers to insure the reliability, accuracy, and functionality of data changes and/or enhancements.

All requirements will flow through you from syndicated partners

REQUIREMENTS
Programming expertise with Scala, Java, Python etc.
Experience with full scale cloud environments such as AWS/AZURE etc.
Strong SQL knowledge, good communication, coordination skills
Bachelor's degree in quantitative field or equivalent education/experience
Must have experience with Media and Entertainment industry
2+ years of experience in large faced-paced, development environment
Thorough understanding of operational procedures and systems
PREFERRED SKILLS
Hands on experience with very large data sets
Knowledge of Big Data technologies such as SPARK, Hadoop etc.,
Understanding of real-time data feeds, data lakes, visualizations etc.,
Strong desire to develop and deliver data driven decision making
Master(TM)s degree in quantitative area preferred (Data Science, Math, Science),We are seeking a SQL programmer/developer to work for a Fortune 500 company within the Cable/MSO space. The ideal candidate will be working closely with both Senior/Junior Analysts to help maintain databases, and incorporate new data retrieved. To apply email LMurray@TechUSA.net-Ideally seeking someone with functional database skills to create data sets, stand up tables, producing sets & queries -3-5 years of industry experience -Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science or equivalent major required -Expert skills with SQL -Experience and proficiency with common, popular database technologies including SQL Server, Oracle and MySQL -Familiarity with Scripting in perl or a similar language -Knowledge of database full life cycle design and application development -Significant experience particularly in desktop data analysis tools including Excel - Tableau would be a big plus! -ETL experience with Pentaho or Hadoop a big plus! -Demonstrated experience in gathering complex reporting requirements, designing and implementing insightful Visualization Solutions (Reports, Dashboards, Metrics, KPI’s) About Tech USA: Tech USA is a comprehensive provider of staffing and workforce solutions throughout the Infrastructure and Information Technology Industries, including Education, Healthcare, Financial, Government, Engineering, and Cyber Security. We are actively seeking candidates for contract, contract-to-hire, project support and permanent placement jobs throughout the nation. View our website to see a list of our current open positions; however, not all of our positions are listed so don’t forget to submit your resume and request a consultation with one of our IT recruiting specialists to explore your opportunities further. At Tech USA we understand that next to your family, your career is one of the most important aspects to a happy and fulfilling life. This is why we take the time to truly understand and get to know our candidates, so we can then pair them with the right job, not just any job. As a result, Tech USA is known throughout the industry for quality, reliability and the highest satisfaction from both our clients as well as the candidates that we represent. Contact a local Tech USA representative today and learn about the many opportunities we may have available for you. Tech USA is an equal opportunity employer.,Data Analyst Horsham, PA 19044

My client, a loan origination company in Horsham, PA is in need of a Data Analyst for a 9 month + contract to potential hire opportunity to help build out a new Data Warehouse.

Responsibilities include:

· Writing source to target mapping documentations

· Performing SQL queries

Qualifications include:

· 5 + years of data analytics experience

· Extensive SQL querying experience

· Expert level Microsoft Excel experience

· Understanding of Data Warehouse concepts
Dimensions
Fact Tables
Star Schema
· Strong analytical mind within data

· Detail oriented (this is vital work for the Data Engineering team)

· Strong communications skills in order partner with the business side

· Be able to pick apart the current Data Warehouse

Compensation Expectations:

· $50 - $60/Hour W2

· Full Benefits: Healthcare, Dental, Vision,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Business/Data Analyst in Wilmington, DE.

Responsibilities Include:
Serve as a liaison between CCB Finance technology and LOB POs
Assist in developing requirements, strategy, scope and priorities
Analyze and document business/data requirements and produce detailed functional specifications and data lineage
Analyze and document process flows and develop target state processes
Provide technical and functional support throughout the project lifecycle
Work with the development team to facilitate the development effort (e.g. ensuring development teams' understanding of the specifications)
Develop use stories, and partner with the business to ensure sign-off on all requirements, testing and implementation
Develop and mock-up user interfaces and reports
Facilitate implementation of new functionality through training sessions, demonstrations, and the development of appropriate documentation
REQUIREMENTS:
Expert in modeling process flows, data relationship flows and event sequencing
Able to understand the logic of code and to construct complex data queries
Advanced business and data analysis, business process and application knowledge
Can you picture yourself working for one of -America's Ideal Employers-? Our client has received numerous awards and accolades due in part to their commitment to diversity, veterans, and fostering innovation. They've been named one of Fortune Magazine's -World's Most Admired Companies- of 2018 and are included in the -Top 50 Most Innovative Companies- named by Boston Consulting Group. With on-site training and mentoring, they are committed to your professional development as well.

Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Direct HireData Analyst

The Data Analyst will be working with high volumes of data to support project needs. Your success is dependent on building a strategic partnership and becoming aligned with the operations and technology teams. We require a candidate with the motivation to succeed and a passion to excel. The candidate must be capable of rising to the challenge of working for a preeminent organization that serves national clients. As an industry leader, we expect our team to be willing to learn to accomplish their work with the highest operational excellence. You will work internally across departments and externally with clients and vendors, so it is imperative to always demonstrate the highest level of professionalism.

Responsibilities of the Data Analyst include:

Manipulate large amounts of data (mass insert, update, upsert, delete) either directly, using SQL statements or Excel, or through dedicated data management software Review project requirements and provide expert advice regarding the structure of databases and forms
Utilize data analysis and SQL skills to design and develop database queries, extract participant-level data from databases and analyze the data using a variety of analytical techniques
Generate and analyze data reports from internal and external sources
Research and data-mine as directed to retrieve data/status and develop/provide metrics as required
Collaborate in all aspects of the collection, verification and entry of data Perform data transfer functions by importing and exporting data to and from the SQL Server, or other sources Conduct quality control and auditing of databases in a client/server environment to ensure the accurate and appropriate use of data
Design workflows to control access to data and optimize the flow of information
Provide all activities related to the administration of databases
Provide data and analytical support for cases
Document guidelines for appropriate database usage, data maintenance, and key report processing
Monitor data management repositories and communicate documentation to team Support with organization, tracking, maintenance and validation of spreadsheets Develop a process and associated plan for the maintenance of existing reports, trackers, and documents for the creation, incorporation and maintenance of new reports Design, implement, and maintain complex databases with respect to access methods, access time, device allocation, validation checks, organization, protection and security, documentation, and statistical methods
Fully document all work and comply with development best practices
Participate in and conduct code reviews of both team and vendor-supplied code and determine quality, identify bugs and evaluate risks
Ensure architecture is consistent with organizational development standards and align with industry guidelines and best practices
Continually work towards strengthening industry knowledge and all relevant applications
Communicate regularly and effectively with all colleagues
Exhibit a very organized approached and superior attention to details
Meet regularly with managers to provide feedback and facilitate communication
Adhere to all business processes while performing tasks
Able to take on new tasks and responsibilities as needed
Perform other work-related duties as assigned by management

Requirements of the Data Analyst:

Bachelors(TM) degree in computer science, business or other related field or discipline
Database system(s) experience required
Complex data analytics experience required
LAW PreDiscovery " LexisNexis experience preferred
SQL, advanced Excel (including VBA), data mining; prior coding experience constitutes an advantage
System implementation and system integration experience
Skilled in business analysis, process improvement, and project management
Minimum of 3-5 years of experience and a demonstrated track record of accomplishments
Aggressive problem diagnosis and creative problem-solving skills
Demonstrate a high degree of productivity while handling multiple tasks simultaneously
Ability to perform comfortably in a fast-paced, deadline-oriented work environment
Excellent written, verbal, communication, and research skills a must
Ability to be flexible to adapt and act quickly when urgent matters require it
Able to work effectively with diversified individuals of various ethnic backgrounds and professional
competencies
Project a positive, professional image toward clients, vendors, and staff in all interactions and situations
Maintain the highest level of confidentiality
Problem analysis and resolution skills at both a strategic and functional level
Excellent computer skills including all MS Office applications. (Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint) required
Must be presently authorized to work in the U.S. without a requirement for work authorization
sponsorship by our company for this position now or in the future

#LI-DR1,Location: REMOTEDescription: Our client is currently seeking a Senior Data Analyst to join their team on a contract basis. The role can sit entirely remote. Healthcare experience is a hard requirement.

This job will have the following responsibilities:

• Business Intelligence development and architecture, to automate and build reporting solutions in Tableau
• SQL (or equivalent skills) to derive data logic needed for reporting
• Participation within Rapid Response process to answer ad hoc questions as needed
• Ability to mature and participate in Quality Control process as needed
• Ability to disseminate business requirements into solution needs and maintain associated documentation
• Ability to communicate effectively with all levels of leadership

Qualifications & Requirements:
• Tableau
• SQL, or equivalent
• Experience with data virtualization and data modeling concepts
• High level of data literacy, and experience with Data Visualization/Data Storytelling techniques

Contact: ashissler@judge.com
This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com

Job Requirements:,Location: Boothwyn, PADescription: Our client is currently seeking a Data Analyst and Report Writer
Permanent OpportunityW2 Only Boothwyn, PA
Objective:
This position is responsible for owning and championing the continued expansion, adoption, and usage of the companys business intelligence and reporting platforms for deeper problem, opportunity, trend, and predictive analysis by the companys internal associates.
Essential Duties & Responsibilities: Manage and maintain existing data analytics platform, process jobs, and reporting inventory. •Provide day to day data analytics and reporting solutions using Microsofts Business Intelligence suite of products (SSIS, SSAS, SSRS, etc). •Represent Technology Services as a subject matter expert for company's data environment by understanding all data layer facets of the companys commercial and custom business applications software portfolio, how it is used by the business, and their interrelationships and dependencies. •Partner with internal business stakeholders and technology colleagues to understand business solution requirements and integrate those requirements into tangible business intelligence solutions. •Develop business intelligence data management methodology, standards, and best practices for managing the platform (data models, extraction, transformation, load, development, test and acceptance, release to production, and documentation). •Responsible for continued life-cycle development of the platform inclusive of but not limited to:
•Functional Requirements •Architecture •Source-to-target Mapping •Extraction, Transformation, & Load •Test, Acceptance, Release to Production •Documentation •Internal Customer Knowledge Transfer •Champion the continued expansion, adoption, and usage of the companys data analytics and reporting platform for two and three dimensional ad-hoc data analysis, ad-hoc reporting, and recurring production reporting. •Adhere to established change management practices and protocols when implementing software solutions into production.
Authority and Accountability: •Provides technical leadership to business intelligence team.
Skills, Competencies and Experience: •5+ years of progressive experience in a same or similar position. •Well-organized and self-starting individual with a passion for transferring hard to access data into easily accessible and meaningful information for improved decision making. •Detailed knowledge of two and multi dimension data modeling. •Working knowledge of ETL. •In-depth experience with Microsofts business intelligence product suite (SSIS, SSAS, SSRS). •The ability to balance competing priorities against optimal benefit to the organization. •An ability to work well and productively, always projecting a positive outlook in a fast-paced, sometimes stressful environment. •Ability to establish and achieve service levels. •Ability to provide solution leadership for the company in business intelligence solutions and become a trusted advisor. •Ability to lead peers and internal clients in solution discussions, mentoring and training as needed. •Proven experience partnering with business unit leaders translating specifications into workable solutions. •Superior Estimating and project management skills. •Ability to work with third party consulting providers. •Experience developing scorecards, dashboards, KPIs and reports. •Knowledgeable in BI, DW and Data Analysis technologies and be able to make informed selections based on their knowledge and experience. •Experience in process / document flow reporting. •An ability to manage and work with a culturally diverse population.
Preferred •Experience working within a healthcare or related industry
Strong working knowledge of: •Two and Multi Dimensional Data Modeling (SQL and Cube). •SQL Statements and Constructs. •Microsoft SQL Server. •Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) •Microsoft SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS) •Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services (SSAS) •Microsoft SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS) •Microsoft Report Builder for End User Ad-Hoc Reporting. •Microsoft SharePoint. •Previous experience in the field of health care and a working knowledge of Electronic Medical Record and Reimbursement systems is required.
Education, Certifications, Trainings: Required •Bachelor's degree or equivalent combination of education and experience.

Contact: kdunlevy@judge.com
This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com

Job Requirements:,Salary:
Published Job Title:
Data Analyst Supporting the FBI

Requisition::
20-188

Worksite::
FBI

Position Schedule::
Full-time

Description::
Be a part of the nationwide law enforcement initiative that removes the tools of crime from criminal organizations, depriving wrongdoers of proceeds from their crime and impacting the infrastructure of criminal enterprises.

Focused on delivering unsurpassed services in support of law enforcement and homeland security, FSA, a rapidly growing joint venture owned by trusted solutions providers SAIC and Amentum, has a vacancy for a Data Analyst. In this role, you will be supporting the overall mission of the FBI.

Responsibilities
Receives, gathers, analyzes, and organizes information from multiple sources.
Ensures completeness of received information and reconciles inconsistencies.
Accurately enters required data into one or more databases, documents, or spreadsheets.
Establishes and maintains physical files.
Keeps track of case file status in order to ensure compliance with established deadlines.
Coordinates requests for additional information as needed.
Selects relevant information from a variety of sources in order to prepare documents, reports, summaries, and replies to inquiries, ensuring accuracy and proper format of the information provided.
Performs word processing relevant to the case.
Provides accurate and timely status updates.
Performs other duties as assigned.

Requirements::
NOTE: Applicants with an Active Top Secret Security Clearance and experience as a Legal Assistant or Legal Aid are preferred.

Requirements
High School diploma or GED, Undergraduate degree preferred
Ability to grasp and understand the organization and functions of the customer
Meticulous data entry skills
Excellent communication skills; oral and written
Competence to review, interpret, and evaluate complex legal and non-legal documents
Attention to detail and the ability to read and follow directions is extremely important
Strong organizational and prioritization skills
Experience with the Microsoft Office suite of applications (Excel, PowerPoint, Word) and other common software applications, to include databases, intermediate skills preferred
Proven commitment and competence to provide excellent customer service; positive and flexible
Ability to work in a team environment and maintain a professional disposition
This position requires U.S. Citizenship and a 7 (or 10) year minimum background investigation

Agency Overview

The mission of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is to protect the American people and uphold the Constitution of the United States. FBI investigates a broad range of criminal violations, integrating the use of asset forfeiture into its overall strategy to eliminate targeted criminal enterprises. The FBI has successfully used asset forfeiture in White Collar Crime, Organized Crime, Drug, Violent Crime, and Terrorism investigations.

Shift Schedule::
Normal business hours

EEO Statement::
Forfeiture Support Associates (FSA) LLC is proud to be an Affirmative Action/ Equal Opportunity Employer. We recruit, employ, train, compensate, and promote qualified persons in all job titles without regard to age, ancestry, color, gender, HIV status, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation (including gender expression and identity) veteran status, family leave status, and any protected group status as defined by applicable law.

FSA Internal Use Only::,We are seeking a Sr. Analyst/PM to work for a Fortune 500 company within the Telecommunications industry. The ideal candidate wil come in to compliment the highly technical lead to work on breaking into new data. To apply please email LMurray@TechUSA.net!- Collection and synthesizing of data, presentation of key findings, and suggest/implement recommendations for improvements in integration, storage, processing and publication - Conduct detailed correlations and regressions for telecommunications network-related and cable industry product data - Conduct analysis on complex data to uncover nuances and inconsistencies, advising on conflicts and inappropriate data usage - Package data analysis results and trends into concise messaging in a summarized and graphical form - Provide monthly/quarterly benchmarks - Prepare monthly, weekly, daily and ad-hoc reports, including key metrics reports, performance reports, and dashboards - Creating comprehensible documentation including how-to documents and FAQs that describe features of data analysis tool / report / dashboard releases - Work with internal IT (local and corporate), users, external vendors and systems designers to develop new functionality - Assist with automation of all current reporting for future increase in both accuracy and efficiency - Help to identify financial and operational opportunities - Participate in department and project meetings to fully understand vision and direction - Anticipate needs, operate with a sense of urgency, and have the ability to adapt to change quickly - Generate input for Budgeting/Forecasting modelsand planning processes - Experience with High volume ticketing - Excellent communication skills/interpersonal relationships - Functional in Excel with breaking into data -7-10 years of relevant work experience and previous PM/Consulting work is ideal -Bahcelore degree required -Would be breaking into data & getting ready for Jr. analysts to take over -Network background nice to have -Capacity planning nice to have -Experience with High volume ticketing -Excellent communication skills/interpersonal relationships -Functional in Excel with breaking into data -Expert skills with SQL - Knowledge of Data Architecture Principles and Practices - Experience and proficiency with common, popular database technologies including SQL Server, Oracle and MySQL - Knowledge of database full life cycle design and application development - Significant experience particularly in desktop data analysis tools including Excel and Tableau - Demonstrated experience in gathering complex reporting requirements, designing and implementing insightful - Visualization Solutions (Reports, Dashboards, Metrics, KPI’s) - Knowledge of logical data modeling techniques and tools - Experience with enterprise business intelligence platforms such as Cognos, OBIEE, MicroStrategy, etc. - Capable of building strong relationships with leaders across enterprise for both sources of data and consumers. About Tech USA: Tech USA is a comprehensive provider of staffing and workforce solutions throughout the Infrastructure and Information Technology Industries, including Education, Healthcare, Financial, Government, Engineering, and Cyber Security. We are actively seeking candidates for contract, contract-to-hire, project support and permanent placement jobs throughout the nation. View our website to see a list of our current open positions; however, not all of our positions are listed so don’t forget to submit your resume and request a consultation with one of our IT recruiting specialists to explore your opportunities further. At Tech USA we understand that next to your family, your career is one of the most important aspects to a happy and fulfilling life. This is why we take the time to truly understand and get to know our candidates, so we can then pair them with the right job, not just any job. As a result, Tech USA is known throughout the industry for quality, reliability and the highest satisfaction from both our clients as well as the candidates that we represent. Contact a local Tech USA representative today and learn about the many opportunities we may have available for you. Tech USA is an equal opportunity employer.,Data Analyst SAS ProgrammerDescription:

TA-Oncology
Must have clinical programming experience-no exceptions

The Clinical Programming team at GSK has a strong focus on innovative ways of working and we are leading the way to implement these innovations and embracing an evolution for increased data science skills; this is already resulting in the introduction of new programming languages, technology and software. Some of these initiatives include the pathway for adoption of R and Python open source coding into day to day programming tasks, exploring machine learning to drive efficiencies for clinical reporting, developing desktop visualisation capabilities and we even have an annual challenge for Programmers who are rewarded for bringing new innovations into the department. But its not just about the tech! We also encourage involvement in other initiatives too and we focus on your personal development path, building your project and leadership skills, your inter-departmental liaison and collaboration skills and we provide you with opportunities to get closer to the science and decision making.
Within the Oncology clinical programming team Study Biomarker Programmers and Principal Biomarker Programmers support, guide, or make a major contribution to the planning and execution of multiple Biomarker-related programming activities for Company's clinical trials while in close collaboration with Biomarker Statisticians. They are accountable for creating, verifying, and documenting analyses of clinical data while adhering to study protocols, analysis plans & industry standards.

Key Responsibilities:
•Creation of biomarker analysis datasets from a variety of file and formats from either internal or external labs/vendors. The candidate should be comfortable working with a diverse collection of data files in terms of the type (depending on the assays/platform used to generate the data), data format and size.
•Creation of graphs and tables related to biomarker data primarily for exploratory investigations (hypothesis generation or evaluation) with analysis requirements that may change throughout the life of the project.
•Automation of data creation, graphs, tables and certain Statistical analyses using R scripts and developing R-Shiny apps for delivering automated analysis solutions for end users.
•Act as a subject matter expert and work as a guide within own discipline to investigate new technology as directed.
•Provide technical contribution to complex tasks.
•Ensure the collection of programs/outputs and issues are adequately managed for programming activities to achieve business outcomes.
•Apply learning from previous activities to result in quicker and more efficient completion of the current task.
•Share learnings with peers and contribute to internal technical discussions/forums.
•Initiate new directions and novel strategies to achieve department goals.

Basic qualifications:
• BS or higher in mathematics, statistics, data science, computer science or related discipline.
• Clinical Programming experience, with a thorough understanding of the end to end clinical trial process.
• Recognized expertise in R, SAS programming, and script/macro code development.
• Understanding of other products such as R-Shiny, Python, JMP, SAS/GRAPH, SAS Output Delivery System.
• Excellent communication skills with a demonstrated ability to collaborate across functions.
• A solid level of understanding of the pharmaceutical regulatory and publishing processes (e.g. 21 CFR Part 11).
• Demonstrated knowledge of and experience in the application of CDISC data and standards, primarily the creation and use of ADaM datasets.

SRG is an Equal Opportunity Employer - All qualified applicants will receive consideration without regard to race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or any other factor determined to be unlawful under applicable law.

Job Requirements:,Location: Wilmington, DESalary: Open
Description: Our client is currently seeking a Business Analyst/Data Analyst

W2 only position. C2C candidates will not be accepted.
• Assist in developing requirements, strategy, scope and priorities. • Analyze and document business/data requirements and produce detailed functional specifications and data lineage. • Analyze and document process flows and develop target state processes. • Provide technical and functional support throughout the project lifecycle. • Work with the development team to facilitate the development effort (e.g. ensuring development teams understanding of the specifications). • Develop use stories, and partner with the business to ensure sign-off on all requirements, testing and implementation • Develop and mock-up user interfaces and reports • Facilitate implementation of new functionality through training sessions, demonstrations, and the development of appropriate documentation.
Contact: alytwyn@judge.com
This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com

Job Requirements:,Piper Companies is looking for a Technical Business Analyst for an leading financial solutions client located in Horsham, PA.

Responsibilities for the Technical Business Analyst:
Gather and translate business requirements into functional specs - focused on data reporting efforts
Act as the liaison between the business and IT teams
Qualifications for the Business Analyst:
5+ years as a Business Analyst focused on data-centric projects
Experience creating technical requirement documents through translation of business requirements
Comfortable with data warehouse concepts - fact tables, dimensions, star schemas, etc
Experience working on data reporting projects - SSRS, PowerBI, Crystal Reports, Cognos, Business Objects
Capable of running complex SQL queries
Microstrategy experience - a plus
Comfortable using the Atlassian suite (Jira, Tempo, Confluence)
Compensation/Benefits for the Technical Business Analyst:
$55-65/hr (12 month+), Full-time conversion possible
Comprehensive benefit package; Medical, Dental, Vision, 401k, and Paid Time Off
Keywords:

Technical business analyst, business analyst, business systems analyst, product owner, requirements gathering, functional specs, class model, constraint, deliverable, enterprise analysis, feature, functional design, functional requirements, finance, data, statistics, data modeling, data warehouse, etl, sql, data architecture, needs, jad, product, requirements analysis, user stories, olution assessment, servicenow, itsm, it service management, shared services, traceability, use case diagram, stakeholder, benefits, vacation, holiday, 401k,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client that is urgently seeking 2-3 strong PMO Analyst/PMO Lead to support a multi-million dollar Data Center Migration project based in Wilmington, Delaware (DE).

Summary:
This is one of the largest multi-year efforts at our client. It is a global program that will replace data centers in all regions to improve our resiliency and reduce cost. This team will be accountable for working with multiple LOB's groups to transition applications from the legacy Data Centers to the new Data Centers.

REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree in related field
2-5 years as PMO analyst or PMO Lead within a Consulting or Financial domain
Clarity and JIRA experience
Investment Banking domain experience is a plus
Experience of supporting large scale Data Center / Data Center Migration Programs is highly desired
Must have experience of managing suppliers to complete and track deliverables at various stages of the project
Leverage existing project templates/standards set by the Central PMO to support the on-going work within the program/project
Ensuring that all issues are accurately captured in the actions are captured and chased in a timely manner
Support the project manager with tracking milestones and plans dependencies
Cross projects (Data Center Migration/Data Center Deployment/Data Center exit/Data Center Build
Supporting the Project Manager/Site Manager in driving delivery
Self Starter
Additional Desired Requirements:
Familiar with Large Data Program Mission space - Planning, Policy, Resource/Land/Asset Management, and civilian government programs.
Previous experience supporting data programs, preferably government/financial related, AND experience in high-tech Management.
Agile PM experience
PMP Certification
Must be able to demonstrate fast, quality typing
MUST have rapid workshop planning lifecycle experience
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Under the direction of the Data Analyst, the Quality Specialist II, will support activities and procedures associated with complaint data reporting and usage. The Complaints Analyst II will be responsible for pulling, interpreting, and generating metrics and reports for product complaint data from various sources for the local North America Regional Complaint Center as well as for the broader North America Region. Most reports are already established and require a high level of attention to detail in order to provide consistent and accurate information each time they are generated. Ad hoc reports are also required, and the associate will need strong critical-thinking and problem-solving skills in order to translate the requirements into usable and valuable deliverables. Must be highly skilled in verbal and written communication. Strong administrative and organizational skills; ability to work independently and with team. Other responsibilities may be delegated by the Data Coordinator as needed.

Duties:
Generate established reports and metrics in a timely manner. These range from daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly.
Generate ad hoc reports and metrics in a timely manner by transforming new and potentially complex requirements into actionable deliverables.
Monitor process performance to proactively assure complaint center metrics are met based on internal and external customer needs.
Engage with internal analysts throughout the world for data requests, verification, and alignment.
Present data and metrics to teams, leadership, and other stakeholders.
Understand the complaint handling process in order to generate meaningful reports and metrics.
Support data requests for site audits, CAPA investigations, and continuous improvement activities to support the Quality Management System.
Maintains annually competencies through training and documentation of training.
Understand the importance of request in order to properly triage to ensure that higher priority requests are processed first.
Provide feedback to management for compliant process improvement opportunities identified through data analysis.
Raise any escalated customer concerns to the next level of management.
May perform other duties as required.

Knowledge:
High level of problem identification, analysis, and formulation of conceptual/technical and business solutions.
Data extraction experience from a multitude of systems.
Provide support to customer facing teams.
Must be motivated, self-directed, and able to work with minimal supervision.
Ability to assess priorities.
Ability to take ownership, think independently and perform task with minimal supervision.
Teamwork and collaboration.
Bachelor's degree minimum, preferably in Life or Computer/Data Sciences, or in lieu of degree, education and 2+ years of relevant data analysis experience combination.
Stronger candidates will have knowledge of Quality System standards and regulations including 21 CFR 803 & 820, ISO 13485, and Canadian Regulations.

Skills:
Proficiency in data analysis tools and software, including Microsoft Excel at minimum.
Meticulous attention to detail
Strong time management skills
Effective communication
Excellent documentation skills
Ability and desire to learn quickly
Objectivity
Assertiveness
Thoroughness,Job Description
Data Analyst I

Location: San Antonio, TX

THE COMPANY OFFERS…
This role is provides an exciting entry into a long-term career in Data Analytics!
Exposure to a high-performing Leadership Team with the opportunity to engage and learn all areas of the business
New created role – play a part in building your job function
This company supports employees to fast-track professional development in the way of continuing education and internal promotions
YOUR TYPICAL DAY...
Work extensively in SQL Server to build and maintain data-driven dashboards
Serve as a liaison throughout all areas and levels of the organization to gather robust technical requirements
Transform data to make an impact for the overall business
Consistently strive to learn and further develop proprietary and cutting-edge technologies
YOU HAVE…
Foundation in statistical methodologies and SQL script development
Ability to convey work methods, detailing methodology, timelines, deliverables, validations, sources and data normalization
Specific stories to highlight projects that you contributed to at a high level
Highly detailed, with the ability to communicate in business terms
Bachelor’ s Degree in Data Science, Analytics or a related field of study
For a Confidential Conversation and/or Personal Meeting regarding this outstanding career opportunity please contact:

Jada Fowler | 210.807.5640| jfowler@deaconrecruiting.com,Data Business Solutions Analyst **job details:** + location:San Antonio, TX + salary:$41.50 per hour + date posted:Thursday, May 21, 2020 + job type:Contract + industry:Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services + reference:782764 **job description** Data Business Solutions Analyst job summary: A client of ours in San Antonio, Texas is looking for a Data Business Solutions Analyst for a 2 year contract opportunity. Qualified candidates will have the following qualifications: Top skills: Data Analysis (4), SQL (5), Requirements Gathering (3) Top tools: SAS, Tableau, Netezza, Snowflake Responsibilities: Data delivery & reporting for Compliance, Testing, Quality Control location: SAN ANTONIO, Texas job type: Contract work hours: 8am to 5pm education: No Degree Required responsibilities: Data delivery & reporting for Compliance, Testing, Quality Control qualifications: + Experience level: Entry Level + Minimum 3 years of experience + Education: No Degree Required skills: + Netezza (1 year of experience is required) + SAS (1 year of experience is required) + Tableau (1 year of experience is required) Equal Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Job Description
Risk Data Analyst

Location: San Antonio, Texas

THIS COMPANY OFFERS…
Join a newly created, dedicated front-line fraud prevention team with a focus on risk analysis
Focused on what matters most: helping clients meet their investment goals through redefining asset management by building an integrated multi-boutique business
Commitment to connecting the right talent with the right resources in the right environment – employees are empowered to be their best utilizing their unique talents
Opportunity for incentive based compensation benefits
PROJECTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES...
Provide analytical support while working with innovative technologies and application stacks
Design and build analytical tools in the protection of member assets from fraud
Perform quantitative risk analysis to include model development, ongoing monitoring, and validation activities
Develop and grow partnerships with senior Lines of Business and Functional Leaders
YOU HAVE...
Extensive experience with model development and data analytics
Technical expertise in multiple programming languages, data analysis software, visualization tools, and modeling software
Advance working knowledge of Excel, Access, and SQL Server
Excellent communication to all lines of business and stakeholders
For a Confidential Conversation and/or Personal Meeting regarding this outstanding career opportunity please contact:

Felicia Avalos | 210.807.5605 | favalos@deaconrecruiting.com,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a talented Senior Data Analyst in San Antonio, TX.

Responsibilities:
Leverages expert data management knowledge to support in one or many of the information management functions
Tasks may include any of the items noted below:
Identify and implement process improvements
Lead discussions with cross-functional teams on complex problems
Oversee alignment of best practices and tools based on business needs
Co-own and co-manage team mailbox, access groups, best practice forums, virtual training, open hour sessions, etc.
More duties as assigned
REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree in a Business or Science discipline
4 years of work experience in data management, data quality or business application function or related experience can be substituted in lieu of a degree in addition to the minimum years of work experience required or Master's degree in a Business or Science discipline or a related discipline or PhD in a Business or Science discipline or a related discipline
8 or more years of experience in one or more information management functions below and any relevant tools:
Metadata
Data Quality including metrics, dashboards, advance knowledge of frequency and duplicate analysis, cross dataset dependencies, redundancy analysis, etc.
Information Lifecycle Management including archiving, purging, content and document management
Master and Reference Data
Data Security & Privacy
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Responsibilities and Duties:
Partner with data analyst, Business and product owners, to better understand requirements, solution designs, finding bottlenecks, resolutions, etc.
Understand clients business data environment.
Research, Validate the Incoming tables and find any discrepancies in the data and giving the report to the business about the findings.
Propose solutions to critical data issues through specific inquiries and consultation.
Server Monitoring - Should be able to Analyze, Debug and Troubleshoot Server issues
User Access Management He should be familiar with access management tools and how to enable/disable user accesses considering all the compliance policies and rules in the Org.
Update and maintain project artifacts and documents. Assist in developing knowledge assets such as methodologies, templates, etc.
Should be having good knowledge of Agile and Scrum
Required Skills:
6+ years Exp--Excellent Domain knowledge of maintaining data and validation
6+ Years Exp--Must have strong SQL knowledge, understanding of Databases like SQL Server, Oracle, Netezza
3+ Years --SAS Enterprise Guide 8.1
2+ Years --Aginity (Workbench for Hadoop)
2+ Years--Domain Knowledge of Business side.
Good to have:
Linux
Putty
Python
Agile and SCRUM
Reporting Tools like BO\Tableau,CHENEGA
HEALTHCARE SERVICES, LLC

Company
Job Title:

Epidemiology
Data Analyst
Chenega
Job Title:
Clearance:

Background
Check
Location:

59th
Medical Wing, TX
Reports
To:
FLSA
Status:

Exempt,
Full Time, Regular
Prepared
Date:
06-26-2020
Approved
Date:
06-26-2020

THIS POSITION IS CONTINGENT UPON BID AWARD

Summary:

The Epidemiology/Data Analyst instructs all levels of Enterprise-Wide
information system managers and users, to include but not limited to CHAS
application users, on various epidemiology and data base applications.

Duties and
Responsibilities:
Coordinates database; create user profiles; query
system to produce reports; perform data cleaning and quality control; and
maintain data dictionary statistics.
Develop and implement empirically sound
data analysis plans in keeping with evaluation and research questions.
Perform routine and complex statistical analysis,
ensuring statistical integrity and efficiency using statistical software, such
as Statistical Package Social Sciences (SPSS), R , or Statistical Analysis
Software (SAS).
Coordinate all data collection and
entry activities, ensuring minimum data integrity standards and completion of
tasks in a timely manner.
Identify data entry barriers, working with program
staff to research and address issues.
Collaborate with staff to implement
data entry plans, scheduling and monitoring completion of tasks; recommend
strategies for optimizing and integrating data across multiple platforms.
Analyze reports of data duplicates or
other errors to provide ongoing appropriate communication with staff.
Generate routine and ad hoc reports, charts and other
department presentation materials.
Provide support to develop new data collection
instruments and pilot testing.
Implement or support all research and
program evaluation projects, including writing evaluation plans and research
proposals, publications and researching grant
opportunities.
Update evaluation data; provide to staff requests
for data; and conduct routine
e-literature search.
Identify and interpret trends and patterns in complex
data sets. Develop and conduct surveys and focus groups, and gather other forms
of qualitative data, including participant recruitment, volunteer training and scheduling.
Research and provide surveillance
accounts of emerging research findings in the field as they relate to key areas.
Develop and design systems based or
automated solutions to enable data collection, tracking and reporting.
Engage operational and Line of Air
Force (LAF) leadership and functional managers where necessary to identify and
procure data sharing and user agreements.
Other
duties as assigned
Minimum
Qualifications: (To
perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each
essential duty satisfactorily.)
Master’s degree in any one of these areas:
Epidemiology, Bio-Statistics/Statistics, Public Health or closely related fields.
Minimum of four (4) years of experience, preferably
within the last five (5) years working in a similar public health role,
conducting epidemiologic research and/or program evaluation and statistical
analysis preferred
Expert knowledge of statistical software to perform complex statistical analysis and to compute data, including regression and modeling, required.
Knowledge, Skills
and Abilities:
Excellent Communication skills written and oral in English
Ability to use computer and different office and military software (with training)
Strong customer service skills
Maintain a high level of confidentiality and integrity in dealing with sensitive issues, exhibiting professionalism always.
Capability of building relationships with all levels of providers.
Ability to meet and adhere to stringent deadlines.
Physical Demands:
(The physical demands described
here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable
accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform
the essential functions.)
While performing the duties of this
Job, the employee is regularly required to sit and talk or hear. The employee
may use repeated motions that include the arms, wrists, hands and/or fingers. The
employee is occasionally required to walk, stand, climb, balance, stoop, kneel,
crouch, or crawl. The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25
pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision.
Work Environment: (The work environment
characteristics described here are representative of those an employee
encounters while performing the essential functions of this job.)
The employee will normally work in
a temperature-controlled office environment, with frequent exposure to electronic
office equipment.
During visits to areas of
operations, may be exposed to extreme cold or hot weather conditions. Is occasionally exposed to fumes or airborne
particles, toxic or caustic chemicals, and loud noise.
Chenega
Corporation and family of companies is an EOE.

Equal Opportunity
Employer/Veterans/Disabled

Native
preference under PL 93-638.

We
participate in the E-Verify Employment Verification Program.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a talented IT Data Science Analyst in San Antonio, TX.

Job Functions:
Responsible for insight delivery on work items revolving around finance systems
Pull data to help close business gaps
Assess and work files
High self-motivated data analysts with ability to onboard/catch-on quickly.
More duties as assigned
REQUIREMENTS:
2+ years using SQL
2+ years using SAS
1-2 years experience in Tableau
1-2 years experience in Excel
Preferred:
Worked in Data Science in previous professional position(s)
Strong SQL skills
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,· Day to Day Responsibilities:• Partners with key stakeholders in the business to identify, assess, aggregate and document risks and controls, including risks associated with new or modified products, services, distribution channels, regulations and third party operations. May present findings to various levels of leadership. Communicates results of risk assessments to governance committees, business process owners and various levels of leadership.

• Contributes to the implementation of new risk policies, practices, appetites and solutions to ensure holistic understanding and management of risks according to industry best practice. Enhances strategies, tools, and methodologies to measure, monitor, and report risks.

• Applies intermediate knowledge to utilize or produce analytical material for discussions with cross-functional teams to understand business objectives and influence solution strategies.

• Effectively contributes in cross-functional teams to identify, assess, aggregate and mitigate current and emerging risk events.

• Effectively contributes to projects that impact the organization.

• Supports the formulation of stress test plans for a line of business or the enterprise including the evaluation of results, and framing of contingency plans in partnership with key business stakeholders.

Job Requirements:

Experience Required:

• Data Profiling and analysis

• Business Requirement Development

• SAS, Tableau, SQL, SharePoint management of data

• Data process flow analysis

• Data Mapping

• Business Requirements

• Testing/Validation

• Issue and Risk identification and remediation,STRATEGIC STAFFING SOLUTIONS HAS AN OPENING!Strategic Staffing Solutions (S3) prides itself on being an international IT Staffing and Solutions Company with 29 years experience recruiting and managing exceptional IT and Business consultants for customers in the Financial, Energy, Public Sector and Retail Distribution industries. A privately held, financially strong, woman-owned company, S3 is a full service IT firm, with 24 major market locations in the U.S!

If you meet the requirements described below, send resume and contact information to Nick Cavazos, Sr. IT Sourcing Specialist, ncavazos@strategicstaff.com for more details.

Title: Sr. Risk Analyst (IT, IS and/or Data expertise)

Location: Remote (based out of San Antonio, TX)

Type: W2

OVERVIEW

Can you give me your top three skills in the order of importance and include the number of years of experience for each skill?

• Operational Risk Experience at least 4-5 years, Information Security, Information Technology, or Data Management at least 5 years, Ability to design and/or evaluate controls and test 3-5 years experience.

What are the three top technology tools that this resource must have knowledge using?

• Any GRC Tools, Rally, Microsoft Products

What are the hours in which they will operate (Mon-Fri 8am-5pm)?

• Time Frame listed

What are the responsibilities that this resource will have on a day to day basis?

• Would be working with First Line Security experts in discussing IT/IS or Data Management processes and procedures in terms of ensuring that appropriate controls are designed and operated. In addition work would involve providing oversight on development of frameworks, policies, and standards
• Performing some monitoring of operations through evaluating key risk measures.
• Performing a leadership role in Second Line of Defense effective challenges and documenting findings and risks, performing risk assessments, preparing status reports, including developing appropriate risk reporting and KRIs and Risk Appetite measures

$$ WE OFFER A REFERRAL FEE FOR ANYONE REFERRED & HIRED WITH S3! $$

Strategic Staffing Solutions (S3), based in Detroit, Michigan, prides itself on being an international, woman-owned, $260 million IT and Business Services Corporation. We are ranked 16th among the largest staffing firms in the US by Staffing Industry Report and are one of five companies nationally certified as a Charter Partner with Staffing Industry Analysts. S3 provides IT consulting, customized project solutions, vendor management programs and executive search services to financial institutions, insurance, energy, oil/gas, telecommunication, government, retail and health care industries worldwide. We have more than 2,700 consultants and 31 offices in the US and Europe.S3 is also proud to be nationally recognized as both a Military Friendly and Military Spouse Friendly Employer.

As an S3 employee, youre eligible for a full benefits package which may include: Medical Insurance, Dental Insurance, Vision Insurance, 401(k) Plan, Vacation Package, Life & Disability Insurance Plans, Flexible Spending Accounts, and Tuition Reimbursement.

The global mission of S3 is to build trusting relationships and deliver solutions that positively impact our customers, our consultants, and our communities. The four pillars of our company are to: Set the bar high for what a company should do, Create jobs, Offer people an opportunity to succeed and change their station in life, and improve the communities where we live and work through volunteering and charitable giving.

Strategic Staffing Solutions is an Equal Opportunity Employer

Job Requirements:,STRATEGIC STAFFING SOLUTIONS HAS AN OPENING!

Strategic Staffing Solutions (S3) prides itself on being an international IT Staffing and Solutions Company with 29 years experience recruiting and managing exceptional IT and Business consultants for customers in the Financial, Energy, Public Sector and Retail Distribution industries. A privately held, financially strong, woman-owned company, S3 is a full service IT firm, with 24 major market locations in the U.S!

If you meet the requirements described below, send resume and contact information to Nick Cavazos, Sr. IT Sourcing Specialist, ncavazos@strategicstaff.com for more details.

Title: Sr. Risk Analyst (IT, IS and/or Data expertise)
Location: Remote (based out of San Antonio, TX)
Type: W2

OVERVIEW
Can you give me your top three skills in the order of importance and include the number of years of experience for each skill? Operational Risk Experience at least 4-5 years, Information Security, Information Technology, or Data Management at least 5 years, Ability to design and/or evaluate controls and test 3-5 years experience.

What are the three top technology tools that this resource must have knowledge using?Any GRC Tools, Rally, Microsoft Products

What are the hours in which they will operate (Mon-Fri 8am-5pm)? Time Frame listed

What are the responsibilities that this resource will have on a day to day basis? Would be working with First Line Security experts in discussing IT/IS or Data Management processes and procedures in terms of ensuring that appropriate controls are designed and operated. In addition work would involve providing oversight on development of frameworks, policies, and standards
Performing some monitoring of operations through evaluating key risk measures.
Performing a leadership role in Second Line of Defense effective challenges and documenting findings and risks, performing risk assessments, preparing status reports, including developing appropriate risk reporting and KRIs and Risk Appetite measures

$$ WE OFFER A REFERRAL FEE FOR ANYONE REFERRED & HIRED WITH S3! $$
Strategic Staffing Solutions (S3), based in Detroit, Michigan, prides itself on being an international, woman-owned, $260 million IT and Business Services Corporation. We are ranked 16th among the largest staffing firms in the US by Staffing Industry Report and are one of five companies nationally certified as a Charter Partner with Staffing Industry Analysts. S3 provides IT consulting, customized project solutions, vendor management programs and executive search services to financial institutions, insurance, energy, oil/gas, telecommunication, government, retail and health care industries worldwide. We have more than 2,700 consultants and 31 offices in the US and Europe.S3 is also proud to be nationally recognized as both a Military Friendly and Military Spouse Friendly Employer.
As an S3 employee, youre eligible for a full benefits package which may include: Medical Insurance, Dental Insurance, Vision Insurance, 401(k) Plan, Vacation Package, Life & Disability Insurance Plans, Flexible Spending Accounts, and Tuition Reimbursement.
The global mission of S3 is to build trusting relationships and deliver solutions that positively impact our customers, our consultants, and our communities. The four pillars of our company are to: Set the bar high for what a company should do, Create jobs, Offer people an opportunity to succeed and change their station in life, and improve the communities where we live and work through volunteering and charitable giving.
Strategic Staffing Solutions is an Equal Opportunity Employer,Business Data Analyst (SQL Tableau) Category IT- Infrastructure Posted 07072020 San Diego, California Contract To Hire Description Job Title Business Data Analyst (SQL Tableau expertise) W2 contract to hire About the Opportunity A well respected San Diego healthcare organization is looking to bring on a SQL Data Analyst on a contract to hire basis. The ideal candidate will have a passion for data analytics and an excellent track record of analyzing and manipulating data to provide tangible insights. This is a high-profile position that will be interacting with and presenting findings to top level management, outstanding communication is a must! This is a great chance to join an industry leader and contribute to their long-term success. If this aligns with your career goals and you're qualified and interested don't hesitate to apply! Responsibilities Provide in depth data analysis and communicate findings clearly to management Produce actionable data reporting using SQL Tableau to contribute to business decision making Work closely with stakeholders across multiple divisions to determine reporting and data analytics needs Present business relevant findings to executive team on a monthly and ad hoc basis to facilitate ongoing business strategy Qualifications Must have the ability to analyze data and be willing to present and clearly communicate finding to the executive team. Working knowledge of SQL. Experience with reporting tools such as SSRS andor Tableau Ability to effectively participate in various activities and to interact with other departments and staff effectively. Demonstrated organizational, analytical and problem solving skills ability to meet rapidly changing deadlines Detail oriented, able to follow directions quickly and efficiently, possesses a good attitude about operational or functional change. Excellent written and verbal communication skills. Interested in learning more? Please don't hesitate to give us a call at 858-242-5611 or visit our website www.sayvasolutions.com for more information, or follow our LinkedIn page for updates here httpswww.linkedin.comcompanysayva-solutions . If you are already working with a Sayva team member, contact them directly and they will be happy to discuss this opportunity in more detail. Also feel free to contact me directly at joesayvasolutions.com About Sayva Sayva Technology provides consulting, contract to hire, and direct hire recruiting to support project and full-time placement needs. Our decades of combined industry experience has fostered a vast network and emphasis on efficiency, responsiveness, and quality results. LI-JH1,Salary:
Published Job Title:
Administrative Assistant / Data Analyst Supporting the DEA

Requisition::
20-318

Worksite::
DEA

Position Schedule::
Full-time

Description::

Be a part of the nationwide law enforcement initiative that removes the tools of crime from criminal organizations, depriving wrongdoers of proceeds from their crime and impacting the infrastructure of criminal enterprises.

Focused on delivering unsurpassed services in support of law enforcement and homeland security, FSA, a rapidly growing joint venture owned by trusted solutions providers SAIC and Amentum, has a vacancy for a Data Analyst/Driver Messenger. In this role, you will be supporting the overall mission of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).

Responsibilities
Receives, gathers, and organizes information from multiple sources.
Ensures completeness of received information and reconciles inconsistencies.
Accurately enters required data into one or more databases, documents, or spreadsheets.
Establishes and maintains physical files.
Keeps track of case file status in order to ensure compliance with established deadlines.
Coordinates requests for additional information as needed.
Selects relevant information form a variety of sources in order to prepare documents, reports, summaries, and replies to inquiries, ensuring accuracy and proper format of the information provided.
Provides accurate and timely status updates.
May be required to occasionally perform driver and messenger activities. This can include operation of Government vehicles or Contractor vehicles in performance of contract requirements and seized conveyances in the custody of the Government.
Delivers messages, documents, packages, and mail to business concerns or Government offices. Can also include delivery of seized assets (including high value and confidential) in accordance with approved Government requirements.
Maintains logs for received and delivered items.
Performs other duties as assigned.
Requirements::

Requirements
High School diploma or GED, Undergraduate degree preferred
Possess a valid driver's license and have a safe driving record
Ability to grasp and understand the organization and functions of the customer
Meticulous data entry skills
Excellent communication skills; oral and written
Competence to review, interpret, and evaluate complex legal and non-legal documents
Attention to detail and the ability to read and follow directions is extremely important
Strong organizational and prioritization skills
Experience with the Microsoft Office suite of applications (Excel, PowerPoint, Word) and other common software applications, to include databases, intermediate skills preferred
Proven commitment and competence to provide excellent customer service; positive and flexible
Ability to work in a team environment and maintain a professional disposition
This position requires U.S. Citizenship and a 7 (or 10) year minimum background investigation

Agency Overview

The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is responsible for conducting national and international investigations targeting global drug trafficking networks and drug-related terrorism involved in the illegal growing, manufacturing, or distribution of controlled substances appearing in or destined for illicit traffic in the United States. A component of DEA's strategic mission is the use of the Asset Forfeiture Program, implementing major investigative strategies against drug networks and cartels, resulting in significant seizure and forfeiture activities.

Shift Schedule::
Normal business hours

EEO Statement::
Forfeiture Support Associates (FSA) LLC is proud to be an Affirmative Action/ Equal Opportunity Employer. We recruit, employ, train, compensate, and promote qualified persons in all job titles without regard to age, ancestry, color, gender, HIV status, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation (including gender expression and identity) veteran status, family leave status, and any protected group status as defined by applicable law.

FSA Internal Use Only::,Systems Analyst - Data Integration and ETL process

We are seeking a talented, results-oriented data specialist to join our motivated and diverse team focusing on informatics and data enablement initiatives in Research and Early Development (R/ED). The individual will manage the product development of a data ecosystem platform and build complementary data pipelines for processing various types of primary and secondary high-dimensional data in pre-clinical and clinical settings where data is being employed to identify molecular drug targets, characterize MOA, prioritize disease indications and generate patient selection hypotheses. This hands-on role interfaces closely with computational scientists in Informatics and Predictive Sciences and business partners in IT and supports programs spanning both discovery and translational sciences. We are seeking an individual with extensive experience integrating data and building data solutions to make data accessible and actionable for the R/ED community.

Responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following:
Manage the product development of a data ecosystem web platform in collaboration with a team of software developers, IT business partners and scientists
Acquire user feedback from both external and internal teams to establish business requirements for a future state integrated ecosystem
Communicate requirements and value proposition of data products from both customer and product owner perspectives to IT business partners and other stakeholders
Perform user acceptance testing, backlog grooming and write user stories in coordination with IT and the developer team to ensure a robust, quality user experience
Design, implement and manage ETL data pipelines that ingest vast amounts of genomic, phenotypic and screening data from public, internal and partner sources
Innovate and advise on latest technologies and best practices in Data Engineering and be able to identify software solutions that can solve pain points in data enablement
Apply value-driven approaches to the development of data ecosystem and pipeline initiatives
Collaborate with colleagues across Informatics and Predictive Sciences to make data, including raw/interim data, available to R/ED department personnel as required
Experience and Education
Bachelor’s degree or a Master’s degree with at least 3 years experience in a scientific or engineering field
Proficiency in object-oriented programming with languages such as Python
Proficiency with modern software development methodologies such as Agile, source control, CI/CD, project management and issue tracking with JIRA
Experience with a metrics-driven approach to building impactful and enabling data products
Working knowledge of ETL pipelines and workflow managements tools preferred, such as Airflow, Luigi, AWS Glue, Amazon Kinesis or AWS Step Functions
Working knowledge of SQL and NoSQL databases preferred, such as Postgres, Redshift, or Elasticsearch
Certified Scrum Product Owner certificate highly preferred
Must thrive in a complex, dynamic environment while adapting to dynamically changing priorities
Must have excellent written and verbal communication and presentation skills
Must have excellent time management, task estimation and organizational skills
If this describes you, please apply today!

Why Kelly®?


By partnering with Kelly® IT, youll have direct connections to top companies around the globegiving you the chance to put your tech skills to work on some of todays most intriguing, innovative, and high-visibility projects. In a world where change is the only constant, our unparalleled connections and IT market expertise help you take your skills exactly where you want to go. Were here to help you gain experience, keep learning, and move your career forward.

About Kelly®


At Kelly, were always thinking about whats next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, were a leading advocate for temporary/nontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world.

Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.

]],Duties:u00a0Youll be exploring, manipulating, and gleaning insights from the collective financial data of 60 million consumers and small businesses. Youll be part of a team that will lead the way for the product teams acceleration towards more data-driven decision making, and your discoveries will help shape product direction of what the product team will be building in the future.u00a0 The position involves close collaboration with the product and data engineering teams, as well as the product and data teams in other business units. The individual must be comfortable partnering with those directly involved with big data infrastructure, software, and data warehousing, as well as product management driving the business.u00a0 Responsibilities:u00a0 Perform hands-on data analysis and modeling with huge data sets. Find and expose insights found through your analysis of our data.u00a0 Your goal will be not only that you understand our users behavior, but also that your stakeholders also understand our users behavior. Propose, implement, and keep track of key product and business metrics, and expose them to your stakeholders through dashboards and reports Determine and explain root causes behind changes in trends for these key metrics Influence product teams through presentations of data-based recommendationsSkills:u00a0
4+ years experience with quantitative analysisu00a0
Experience in any major dialect of SQL (we use MySQL and PostgreSQL)u00a0
Experience with data visualization (we use Tableau for many of our business-facing dashboards, but we wont say no to a ggplot or two)u00a0
Solid communication skills: Demonstrated ability to explain complex technical issues to both technical and non-technical audiencesu00a0u00a0
Hadoop, HDFS, Hive, HBase, and/or related MapReduce technologiesu00a0
Large-scale MPP systems such as Vertica or Redshiftu00a0
Tableau or similar BI softwareu00a0
Experience with Python or similar high-level languagesu00a0
Experience with R or similar statistical analysis software

Job Requirements:,Important note regarding current health crisis Don't give up your search for a new position or project. We're maintaining business as usual during this difficult time. For many of us, the way we work has changed abruptly. However, our clients have adapted their hiring processes to accommodate working remotely where possible, which includes phone and video interviews. Be safe, and don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions. In addition, we offer an excellent benefits package for all consultants, including medical, dental, and vision coverage, a 401k plan, and paid sick leave. Learn more and apply today.Our client, a leader in the biotech industry, has a need for a Sr. Data Governance Analyst for an 8+ month W2 contract opportunity to join early to mid-July. This position will serve as a critical resource for a project implementation and ongoing support of data classification and categorization processes. Candidates local to San Diego preferred This role is responsible to provide deep technical knowledge of all facets of the data governance discipline and lifecycle in order to implement strategic initiatives + provide hands-on support, partnering with team members, business stakeholders and vendor resources. You will partner the Legal Privacy, Cybersecurity, Data Governance, and Information Systems teams and take ownership for the inventory and classification of key data assets. Both structured and unstructured data sources will be interrogated to capture a complete inventory of the specific assets, classifying them in conjunction with our classification schema and building repeatable processes to ensure appropriate attestation and handling of the data is in place. Responsibilities - Collaborate with information systems and business teams to address data classification and categorization needs by object. - Lead cross-functional team members in the implementation of strategic projects and enhancements from requirements gathering through deployment and post-production support. - Manage multiple priorities and stakeholder expectations across data objects. - Maintain active communication with stakeholders to manage expectations regarding changes to the system and the introduction of new and enhanced functionality. - Play an active role in operational readiness testing for application systems, performing hands-on testing and coordinating UAT. - Assess change impacts prior to change deployment. - Analyze problems, diagnose them and find root cause, and then either create a fix or partner with a team to collaboratively design a solution. - Along with Program Management, effectively manage all tasks related to delivering data classification and categorization in support of strategic initiatives and projects. Skills - 7-10 years of experience in data governance, data quality, data preparation, or data architecture in an SAP, SAP MDG, Hana, Salesforce, Informatica, and Tableau environments. - Prior experience in all stages of data discovery, classification, categorization and tagging required. - Ability to effectively communicate technical issues and solutions to business partners, verbally and in writing - MUST be an outstanding communicator. - Ability to listen and discern data governance oversight or involvement with little information. - Ability to troubleshoot and solve process and technical problems. - Hands-on person with exceptional analytical and problem-solving abilities. - Ability to place questions and problems in the proper context. - Ability to address problems logically, carefully, and methodically. - Persistence to pursue problems until they are solved, but also the good judgment to know when to stop and ask questions. - Ability to create and execute test plans. - Ability to effectively prioritize and execute tasks in a fast-paced environment. Strong collaboration skills with global workforce. - Ability to interface well with cross-functional teammates. - Change control experience in an FDA regulated environment. Education - BA or BS in complementary field of study - Data privacy or governance experience required.,Systems Analyst - Data Integration and ETL process We are seeking a talented, results-oriented data specialist to join our motivated and diverse team focusing on informatics and data enablement initiatives in Research and Early Development (RED). The individual will manage the product development of a data ecosystem platform and build complementary data pipelines for processing various types of primary and secondary high-dimensional data in pre-clinical and clinical settings where data is being employed to identify molecular drug targets, characterize MOA, prioritize disease indications and generate patient selection hypotheses. This hands-on role interfaces closely with computational scientists in Informatics and Predictive Sciences and business partners in IT and supports programs spanning both discovery and translational sciences. We are seeking an individual with extensive experience integrating data and building data solutions to make data accessible and actionable for the RED community. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following Manage the product development of a data ecosystem web platform in collaboration with a team of software developers, IT business partners and scientists Acquire user feedback from both external and internal teams to establish business requirements for a future state integrated ecosystem Communicate requirements and value proposition of data products from both customer and product owner perspectives to IT business partners and other stakeholders Perform user acceptance testing, backlog grooming and write user stories in coordination with IT and the developer team to ensure a robust, quality user experience Design, implement and manage ETL data pipelines that ingest vast amounts of genomic, phenotypic and screening data from public, internal and partner sources Innovate and advise on latest technologies and best practices in Data Engineering and be able to identify software solutions that can solve pain points in data enablement Apply value-driven approaches to the development of data ecosystem and pipeline initiatives Collaborate with colleagues across Informatics and Predictive Sciences to make data, including rawinterim data, available to RED department personnel as required Experience and Education Bachelor's degree or a Master's degree with at least 3 years experience in a scientific or engineering field Proficiency in object-oriented programming with languages such as Python Proficiency with modern software development methodologies such as Agile, source control, CICD, project management and issue tracking with JIRA Experience with a metrics-driven approach to building impactful and enabling data products Working knowledge of ETL pipelines and workflow managements tools preferred, such as Airflow, Luigi, AWS Glue, Amazon Kinesis or AWS Step Functions Working knowledge of SQL and NoSQL databases preferred, such as Postgres, Redshift, or Elasticsearch Certified Scrum Product Owner certificate highly preferred Must thrive in a complex, dynamic environment while adapting to dynamically changing priorities Must have excellent written and verbal communication and presentation skills Must have excellent time management, task estimation and organizational skills If this describes you, please apply today! Why Kelly Registered ? By partnering with KellyRegistered IT, you'll have direct connections to top companies around the globe-giving you the chance to put your tech skills to work on some of today's most intriguing, innovative, and high-visibility projects. In a world where change is the only constant, our unparalleled connections and IT market expertise help you take your skills exactly where you want to go. We're here to help you gain experience, keep learning, and move your career forward. About Kelly Registered At Kelly, we're always thinking about what's next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, we're a leading advocate for temporarynontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world. Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.,Job Title Data Analyst As a validation analyst on the Sales Operations team, you will be a key component to meeting overall business data and reporting objectives. This role will review, analyze, and correct sets of data within the Data Warehouse. There is not a one size fits all answer to these data sets. A strong data background, creativity, and curiosity are required to be successful. Responsibilities Validate complex and large volumes of data in the Data Warehouse using a variety of tools, tactics, and mechanisms. Project management of each validation project including coordination of IT and internal team resources. Work with business units in conjunction with Business Unit Managers to clarify sources and methods for historical reporting. Recommend and refine methodologies for IT to apply for increased data accuracy. Prepare sets of data for upload to the Data Warehouse. Ensure that validated data is implemented through dashboards and various reporting methods. Manage special projects and assist the Sales Operations team with ad-hoc requests. Meet deadlines with accurate results in a fast-paced environment. Requirements A minimum of 4 years of experience in data analysis or data management. Advanced or expert user of Microsoft Excel. Experience in Alteryx is required. Experience in PowerBI andor SQL a plus but not required. Ability to identify data issues both at granular and high levels. Highly organized with the ability to identify and communicate project risks. Ability to collaborate in a team environment with a can-do attitude.,Title: SQL Data Analyst
Duration: 6+ Month Contract
Location: Dallas, TX (Remote to start)
Rate: Competitive

Required Skills:
2+ years of experience with reporting and analytics development experience including: dashboards, scorecards, crosstabs, and operational reporting
2+ years of experience in the development of analytical models
Intermediate to advanced knowledge of SQL
Knowledge of one or more reporting / data visualization tools such as PowerBI, Tableau, Qlik View, etc.
Experienced with SSRS
Attention to detail and passion for delivering outstanding service
Ability to multi-task and work independently as well as part of a team; self-motivated
Ability to coordinate delivery of work activities
Ability to communicate ideas both verbally and in writing to influence others using on-on-one contact, formal presentations, and group discussions
Demonstrated capacity to thrive in a high-change, often ambiguous business environment
Please send resumes to Felix.Fermin@mondo.com,Location Richardson, TX Description BASIC FUNCTION Creates specifications for reports and analysis based on business needs and required or available data elements. May provide consultation to users and lead cross-functional teams to address business issues. Produces datasets and reports for analysis using system reporting tools. May perform research and assists in analyzing financial and health data, including medical algorithms to determine health care expenditures, medical and economic outcomes, and cost containment strategies. Analyzes complex business problems and issues using data from internal and external sources to provide insight to decision-makers. Identifies and interprets trends and patterns in datasets to locate influences. JOB REQUIREMENTS The following requirements must be met to determine if an applicant is eligible to apply Bachelor Degree and 5 years experience in health care data statistical analysis OR 7 years experience in healthcare data statistical analysis. 3 years experience in data analysis and information reporting relating to healthcare data Ability to query and analyze large sets of complex healthcare data and 4 years experience using Structured Query Language (SQL) Ability to derive insights from complex data for presentation and decision making Experience with data visualization tools Tableau, MicroStategy or similar Verify accuracy of reports and provide insights. Demonstrated best practices and knowledge of internal or external business issues to improve products or services Ability to independently solve complex problems Ability to work independently with minimal guidance Ability to serve as a resource for colleagues with less experience may direct the work of other staff members. PREFERRED REQUIREMENTS Preference will be given to applicants with the following skills, experience, education, or knowledge Bachelor Degree Experience with visualization tool Tableau or similar highly preferred Experience authoringmaintaining SAS for complex reporting purposes Experience or exposure to clinical data integration Ability to provide subject matter expertise on healthcareinsurance industry Expertise in business analysis ? process flows, facilitation, requirements gathering, testing software systems, etc. Proficient creating and leveraging complex pivot tables Financial analysis related to provider and facility data Contact gvanschaickjudge.com mailtogvanschaickjudge.com?subjectData20Analyst20(SQL2C20Tableau) This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com httpwww.judge.com,Deep functional and technical understanding, ability to lead meetings, ability to determine what needs to be done, and by who and ability to drive the conversation around those initiatives.
The initiative will also establish an authoritative data source for common data elements between Corporate Finance and Corporate Risk management to support in scope risk and regulatory reporting.
This team will create a federated, coordinated set of applications and databases to support risk and finance.
Experience working with OFSAA (Oracle Financial Services Analytical Application) or FSDF (Oracle Financial Services Data Foundation).
Technology: Strong SQL, data analysis, data integration, and banking experience
Skillset
FInance background
Data Governance exp
Regulatory exp
Reporting exp (labeling, what data elements mean what)
Architecture (with respect to data),RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Analyst in Dallas, TX.

Overview:
The Data Analyst will support the organizations commitment to operational excellence and efficiency through the use of reporting, analytics and process improvement. The Data Analyst II will develop queries, key performance indicators, and call center metrics that will provide the business leaders insight. The Data Analyst II will be responsible for ensuring the business understands the effects of new product, process, or campaign launches in the environment. The incumbent will evaluate the data being produced to determine if formal business process improvement (BPI) projects need to be undertaken. The incumbent will also partner with the BPI team throughout the life of the project to ensure metrics and reporting is instilled in the process to drive long term benefits to the organization. The effectiveness of the position will be tied to partnering with business units to understand business direction and strategies; supports implementation of appropriate information systems to fulfill objectives.

Key Tasks:
Develops and maintains queries, reports, and metrics using available mediums to provide customized information for users to make decisions
Accepts a high level of responsibility for integrity of reports and data provided
Leads the creation of custom or standardized reporting decks for presentation of data to stakeholders
Presents reporting decks and integrated insights with confidence to the business and its stakeholders
Initiates and performs analysis of product/process/training/campaign launches in the environment
Relates findings and recommendations to the business owner(s)
Supports the partnership between various
REQUIREMENTS:
Strong SQL experience writing queries
To be considered for this position, candidates must have experience in a similar role, or they must possess significant knowledge, experience, and abilities to successfully perform the responsibilities listed
Relevant education and/or training will be considered a plus
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,job summary:

Randstad Technologies is the worlds largest workforce solutions company and we have an immediate need with a client of ours in the Telehealth industry. They are in need of a Data Analyst! This is a very exciting opportunity and will be a great job to have on your resume!! You will also have the ability to grow within the company.

This is a Direct Hire role with a company that prides itself on innovation, work-life balance and diversity in the workplace. This client is located in the Plano area and is a rapidly growing company! They are ready to move quickly for the right professional. If you fit the description below, please apply and reach out to us today!

location: Plano, Texas
education: Bachelors,POSITION SUMMARYA data management/analyst who enjoys working with healthcare data so as to support clinicians, software developers, and senior leadership with the information and self help tools they need to succeed in growing our business. A lively curiosity about health care data and analytical tools is greatly desired. Position will work remote for now, applicants should live in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.

JOB RESPONSIBILITIES:

• Understand the needs and opportunities across our internal and external stakeholders
• Create, update, and distribute analytic reports on a recurring basis
• Learn new data related skills and processes
• Learn health care claim (UB04, HCFA 1500) formats and analysis
• Share and teach skills to others on the data team
• Work as part of a larger team and helping other teams in achieving their goals
• Continue to push the boundaries of what technology can do to empower our caregivers and clinicians to improve health outcomes for our patients

REQUIREMENTS:

• A College degree (required)
• 5+ years experience working with health care data (e.g. claims, app output, CMS HCC, SDOH, clinical research) in queries or BI tools (required)
• Experience analyzing operational data and correlations it may have to clinical outcomes data
• MS Excel or Google Sheets advanced ability (pivot tables, formatting, graphics) (required)
• Experience with BI tools such as Tableau (highly desired)
• Experience with SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS or other analytic tools for data management and informatics
• Attention to detail along with a true love of data patterns, error detection and correction
• Ability to be a story-teller with data - to see and articulate clearly the story behind the numbers
• Intellectual curiosity around finding the why and digging deep to find patterns others might miss
• Passion about our mission to improve peoples lives
• Comfort in a dynamic and always evolving start-up environment

Job Requirements:

Key Words: healthcare, data, analyst, SQL, SAS, Python, SPSS,Job Description


Job #: 1071315

Develops and leads programs, initiatives for data quality, governance, and metadata activities.

Develops tools and processes used to maintain a common, firm-wide data standard.

Analyzes, assesses and tests data controls and data systems to ensure quality and risk compliance standards are met.

May define strategic requirements, roadmap, or direction for metadata capabilities. Drive analysis and assessment approach during issue remediation life cycle.

Supports and interacts with various functions and groups on multi-domain remediation efforts.

Leverages domain expertise and data / business / process analysis to inform and support solution design.

May drive planning and coordination on low to medium sized remediation efforts, acting as central point of contact.

May provide inputs into communication routines with stakeholders, business partners, and senior leaders.

5+ years of experience in one or a combination of the following: data management, data governance, data quality or data analysis

**Must have Auto Loan Servicing Experience**

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Data Analyst
Our client, one of the largest banks in the US with wealth management, investment banking, and international business, is seeking a Data Analyst

Location: Plano, TX
Position Type: Contract

Job Description the Capital Management Data Analyst is responsible for:

-Research & Analysis – Supporting Traded Products Counterparty Capital Management team from a Treasury Data Management (TDM) perspective in analyzing, monitoring and improving critical Data Flow and Data Quality with the goal of ensuring the timeliness and accuracy of Capital calculations for the Bank. Understanding the overall flow and usage of information from upstream sources and consolidation points used for capital modeling, calculation and reporting processes.
-Subject Matter Expertise – Expert in the understanding of Data Flow, Data Quality and Data Usage of information from upstream sources and consolidation points into Capital for capital calculations and reporting. Be Subject Matter Expert in identifying, analyzing and solving complex data issues in an efficient, transparent and collaborative fashion within TDM.
-Data Controls - Ensuring process controls, data validation activities, Data Quality scripts and measurement processes remain timely and relevant
-Data Remediation - Meeting SLA timelines for Data Incident analysis, Defect or Enhancement classification, Action Plan creation and Target Date delivery for Monthly Data Governance Process compliance.

Required Skills and Experience:

-Minimum 5 years of experience within a financial institution with hands-on experience in Data Analysis
Understanding of Traded Products including Derivatives, Repo, Fixed Income, FX, Equities and their representation in data.
-Must be a self-motivated / self-starter and able to take ownership and self-accountability for ensuring that process controls, data validation activities, data quality scripts and measurement processes remain timely and relevant
-Hands-on experience querying and analyzing large sets of data.
-Strong analytical and problem-solving capabilities skills needed to perform complex data analysis.
-Ability to use SQL to perform complex data profiling activities and analysis of large amounts of data for logical understanding and problem.
-Ability to perform complex data lineage analysis spanning multiple source systems and data transformations from a Capital data perspective
-Strong ability to think logically and critically to develop actionable solutions that help resolve complex data issues for Capital.
-Must be able to build and maintain strong and collaborative working relationships with co-workers on the TDM team as well as Capital and Technology business partners
-Ability to thrive and be energized in a challenging and dynamic environment where priorities and challenges are changing
-Ability to provide clear oral and written communication to a variety of business and technical audiences.

Desired Skills and Experience:

-Hands-on experience querying and analyzing large sets of data.
-Ability to use advanced Excel functions such as pivot tables, VLOOKUP, macros, Visual Basic and more to supplement advanced SQL skills in data analysis exercises.
-Prior experience in performing detailed analysis of Traded Products Data defects to identify patterns or root-causes and recommend improvements to processes or data flows to prevent future defects.
-Working knowledge of SAS, Python, Tableau, and UNIX
-Experience with data projects in Bank system of records and authorized data sources for Traded Products (Derivatives, Repo, Fixed Income, FX, Equities)
-Knowledge and experience with General Ledger data and reconciliation.,Job ID: 030320201
Job Location: Dallas, TX
Apply Now!
Share
|

Senior
Data Analyst


Dallas,
TX


Since 2010, Excite Health Partners has been a growing leader in the Healthcare consulting and staffing industry. We are committed to the development of the HIT industry, which is why we ensure our employees are educated, prepared and confident. We understand our employees are the backbone of our company, so we work to find the best-fit position for each of our unique professionals.

Qualifications

At
Excite, we want you to succeed. We want to help you reach your goals and find a
satisfying and challenging work environment. For the Senior Data Analyst position,
you should meet the following criteria:
At
least 3 years’ related work experience
Previous
experience with at least one of the following modules: Epic Healthy Planet, Crystal
Reports, Reporting Workbench, Oracle SQL, Programming/Coding and/or Tableau
Workbook
3
years’ experience working with PC-based applications
Strong
knowledge of integrating best practices and awareness in the industry
Previous
experience in a healthcare setting
Strong
verbal and organizational communication skills
Bachelor’s
degree or related field experience
Joining the Team

Excite understands that employees are the cornerstone of our success. We are proud to offer the following benefits:
Competitive compensation
Health, Vision, Dental plan
Life and long-term disability
401k plan with designated company match
Weekly pay,SAS Data AnalystPinnacle TechnicalResources, Inc.Dallas, TX
Must travel domestically and/or occasionally relocate to client locations nationwide to support, analyze clientdata using SAS and SAS based tools. Work extensively with SAS/BASE, Enterprise Guide, Miner, Power BI,Tableau, Google Analytics,R Shiny, SSRS, SSIS, MSBI, Git and SVN in multiplatformenvironment to providebusiness insights. Reply to:Pinnacle Technical Resources, Inc., 5501 LBJ Freeway,Suite 600, Dallas, TX 75240.

recblid 4q9ulti3joqil0gbhiiqyoutaklgx0,This role will augment staff for our application team partners to help them reach their Enterprise Data Governance compliance. The consultant will be doing one of two functions based on experience and background. 1) Completing business data dictionaries (metadata) primarily in excel spreadsheets, some of which may be quite complex. We have roughly 300 applications that this will need to go through validation of whether a data dictionary exists. When it does not, or does not meet the policy compliance, the contractor will need to ensure completion and validate results with their assigned domain manager. Experience in completing metadata and/or data traceability is required. 2) Assessing that data quality measures adequately meet the Enterprise Data Governance compliance expectations. The contractor does not need to write data quality rules or implement higher standards. Only assess the current measures in place. A background in data quality, metadata, and/or data governance is required,Business Analyst/Data Analyst

Locations: USA (Irving, TX and Tampa, FL)

Leading Regulatory Risk, Finance and Compliance technology development partner for Globally Systemic Important Bank (GSIB) with strong techno-functional delivery teams across the Globe. As a part of Key enterprise scale regulatory Application transformation program, We are looking for Business/Data Analyst with 6-10 years of experience on Banking rules and regulations such has CCAR, 14A reporting and Part 30. Candidate will also be responsible for preparation of business requirement documents (BRD), business functional requirements (FRD), use cases, process flows and maintaining requirements traceability matrix.. The role will have exposure to state-of-the-art technology ecosystem with very complex Risk and Finance regulatory domain.

Job requirements:
Worked in Multinational Banks on Banking rules and regulations such has CCAR, 14A reporting and Part 30
Must have good knowledge with all the Banking products such as CorpLoans, Personal Loans, Mortgages,Deposits, Trading Securities, Debt, SFT, Derivatives, Margin, Collateral Management and Cards
Experience in preparation of business requirement documents (BRD), business functional requirements (FRD), use cases, process flows and maintaining requirements traceability matrix
Able to document and understand information from multiple data sources
Drive discussions with business users/owners
Should be able to engage with stakeholders, business owners & decision makers to drive project goals
Ability to work fluidly with both business and technical teams
Must have strong SQL skills
working knowledge of data warehousing concepts and ETL
Curious, relentless with excellent written and verbal communication and interpersonal skills
Experience in test strategy, preparation of test scenarios, defects triaging and co-ordination with QA team.
Understanding of SDLC and all phases of project management lifecycle.
Should be well versed with Agile Methodologies
Excellent analytical & problem-solving skills,Job Description
The Sr. Data Analyst will be responsible for data related support, investigation, research, and data management to support development solutions, as well as building and maintaining the enterprise data catalog/glossary. The Sr. Data Analyst will use current data technologies to provide analysis to assist in developing modern, scalable, SQL based solutions serving our business in the mortgage finance industry. This includes the data analysis, occasional development, metadata management and recommendations for design of client and partner integrated data solutions for both proprietary and purchased software.
Provide data analysis to assist in producing well-designed and developed solutions for on time deployment based on list of requirements
Collaborate with scrum team members on complex projects requirements
Perform extensive data validation/quality assurance analysis within large datasets
Troubleshoot and investigate data anomalies and issues along with working directly with the developers to follow through and resolve issues in data lineage and consistency
Work with business analysts to clarify business rules and requirements
Translate business data import and export needs into a maintainable integrations platform
Ensure adherence to corporate development and mortgage industry requirements,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client that is seeking a Data/Business Solutions Analyst Jr in Plano, TX.

Job Summary:
Gathers business requirements and participates in the support and delivery of business solutions. Performs data analysis, extraction and delivery activities. Supports the execution of information and data governance. Performs moderately complex work assignments under minimal supervision.

Job Duties:
Facilitates gathering moderately complex business requirements by defining the business problem, identifying data requirements and isolating data elements
Maintains and assists in the development of moderately complex business solutions, which may include data, reporting, business intelligence or analytics
Leverages a basic understanding of multiple data structures and sources (possesses a working knowledge of multiple data stores) to perform moderately complex data manipulation using standard data extraction and analytical tools and techniques
Develops intermediate business knowledge of the functional area and processes to understand the application of data information to support business function
Supports the implementation of technical data solutions and standards
May support data governance, integrity, quality and audit functions
REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree or 6 years of experience in an analytical or technical support function
4+ years' relevant business support and/or general data analysis/extraction experience
2+ years of experience in an analytical or technical support function or general data analysis/extraction experience
Working knowledge of Microsoft Office products and databases; SQL and/or SAS
Working knowledge of data reporting/analysis tools and techniques (such as business objects, monarch, structured query language, etc.); and leveraging relational databases (such as OLTP/OLAP, DB2 Oracle, SQL Server and/or MySQL)
Working knowledge of identifying, documenting and analyzing business and/or data requirements
Working knowledge of data extraction techniques and applications
Working knowledge of business functional area and processes
Understands the application of data information to support business functions
Knowledge of industry best practices
Possesses agility for learning technical and business concepts
Successful completion of an analyst assessment may be required
Intermediate knowledge of Microsoft Office products and databases; SQL and/or SAS
Intermediate knowledge of data reporting/analysis tools and techniques (such as business objects, crystal, monarch, etc.); relational databases (such as OLTP/OLAP, DB2 Oracle, SQL Server and/or MySQL); database design, and table structures; data warehouse structures and data marts
Intermediate knowledge of identifying, documenting and analyzing business and/or data requirements
Intermediate knowledge of data extraction techniques and applications
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Pricing Data Analyst in Plano, TX.

Manual Pricing Team:
The overall purpose is to provide support for various sales and marketing programs and efforts. This position has supported a steady number of manual pricing requests for renewals, addendums, large opportunities and other business processes (notification and AIA temp suspend, etc.) that the team is responsible for within Partner Exchange channel. This is critical to timely responses to our partners pricing needs which directly impact revenue to the channel.

Roles & Responsibilities:
Review sales requests and create pricing schedules using Excel templates for customer renewals, addendums and nonstandard service opportunities
Provide marketing and sales support to the various Program Sales and Contract teams from pre to post sales including retention and winning back previous customers
Data compilation; reports generation; Reviews/assists with pricing/contract proposals/RFP; Contract renewals; Inventory tracking; compliance; Document archiving
As needed providing development and consultations on emerging services/products and the associated processes
REQUIREMENTS:
To be considered for this position, candidates must have experience in a similar role, or they must possess significant knowledge, experience, and abilities to successfully perform the responsibilities listed
Relevant education and/or training will be considered a plus
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Please find the full job description below and reply with your updated resume if you are interested…

Position: SAP Data Analyst

Location: Irving, TX

Duration: Contract (1+ Year)

Rate: $Open

Job Description:

It should be a SAP Data Analyst that understands how to find certain types of SAP data and how the data is used by the eCommerce parts business. Ideally, this candidate would have deep SAP BI BO Data Warehouse background with data analysis and report/dashboard creation experience with the source data from the SAP modules listed below. Here are the modules the SAP FC will need to have experience creating reports and dashboards, verifying data and running queries about OTC and 2-3 others below modules

o OTC (order to cash)*** most important/critical module experience background. OTC is the ERP module (includes submodules, order & contract management (SD), inventory & warehouse management (MM) and AR (order/invoice/cash)).

o PTP (procure to pay)

o EWM (extended warehouse (physical) management)

o EHS (Environment Health & Safety) product safety, chemicals management, waste management, hazardous substances

o GTS (Global Trade Services - global transactions, risk management, compliance, customs processing...)

Requirements

Note: If interested please send your updated resume naveen.remkumar@two95intl.com and include your salary requirement along with your contact details with a suitable time when we can reach you. If you know of anyone in your sphere of contacts, who would be a perfect match for this job then, we would appreciate if you can forward this posting to them with a copy to us.

We look forward to hearing from you at the earliest!.,Job Title Technical Data Analyst Accounting
Location: Irving TX
Position Type: Fulltime

Description:
We are looking for Technical Business Analyst-Data Analyst with Accounting Background.
Candidate needs to have strong SQL Reporting Development and ETL Experience.
Should be well versed with Basic and Advance Level SQL Coding skills.,About Net2Source, Inc.
Net2Source Inc. is one of the fastest growing Global Workforce Solutions company with a growth of 100% YoY for last consecutive 3 years with over 2200+ employees globally and 30 locations in US and operations in 20 countries.
Net2Source is headquartered at NJ, USA. We offer a wide gamut of consulting solutions customized to our 450+ clients ranging from Fortune 500/1000 to Start-ups across various verticals like Technology, Banking, Financial Services, Healthcare, Life Sciences, Oil & Gas, Energy, Retail, Telecom, Utilities, Manufacturing, Aerospace & Defense and Engineering. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us! Want to read more about Net2Source? Visit us at www.net2source.com

Data Quality Analyst
100% REMOTE
6 Months contract to hire

Top Skills
3 years' experience with Big Data Technologies (HDFS, Sqoop, Hive, Spark, Pig, YARN. etc.)
True analysts that understand data quality and metadata management
Building data quality ingestion framework and pipelines from scratch
Experience coding rules for Data Quality
Metadata Framework Creation
Cloud environment (AWS, Google Cloud, Azure, Etc.)
Experience on an innovative Data team, forward mindset into data
Experience with Owl Analytics (preferred) or any other Enterprise Data Quality Platform (IDQ, Trillium, etc.)
Healthcare experience preferred

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission:
Net2Source, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Net2Source, Inc. is committed to ensuring equal employment opportunities for all candidates and employees. Hiring decisions are solely based upon job related criteria regardless of race, ethnicity, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), marital status, disability, age, national origin, political affiliation, retaliation, parental status, military service, other non-merit factor or any other status protected by U.S. law.

With Regards,
Maninder Kaur
Net2Source Inc.
Global HQ Address 7250 Dallas Pkwy, Suite 825 Plano, Texas 75024
Office: (201) 340-8700 x 408 | Cell: 201-479-1137| Fax: (201) 221-8131| Email: mani@net2source.com

Fast Facts about Net2Source:

Inception in 2007, privately held, Debt free
2200+ employees globally
375+ In- house Team of Sales, Account Management and Recruitment with coast to coast COE.
30 offices in US and 50+ Offices globally
Operations in 20 countries (US, Canada, Mexico, APAC, UK, UAE, Europe, Latin America, Japan, Australia)

Awards and Accolades:
2018 Fastest Growing IT Staffing Firm in North America by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 Fastest-Growing Private Companies in America as a 5 times consecutive honoree Inc. 5000
2018 - Spirit of Alliance Award by Agile1
2018 - 40 Under 40 Leadership Awards by Triangle Business Journal
2018 Fastest 50 by NJBIZ
2018 TechServe Excellence Award (IT and Engineering Staffing)
2018 Best of the Best Platinum Award by Agile1
2018 40 Under 40 Award Winner by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 CEO World Gold Award by SVUS
2017 Best of the Best Gold Award by Agile1,About Net2Source, Inc.
Net2Source Inc. is one of the fastest growing Global Workforce Solutions company with a growth of 100% YoY for last consecutive 3 years with over 2200+ employees globally and 30 locations in US and operations in 20 countries.
Net2Source is headquartered at NJ, USA. We offer a wide gamut of consulting solutions customized to our 450+ clients ranging from Fortune 500/1000 to Start-ups across various verticals like Technology, Banking, Financial Services, Healthcare, Life Sciences, Oil & Gas, Energy, Retail, Telecom, Utilities, Manufacturing, Aerospace & Defense and Engineering. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us! Want to read more about Net2Source? Visit us at www.net2source.com

Jr. Data Warehouse Systems Analyst
Richardson, TX
3-6 Months contract to hire

TOP SKILLS
Data Warehouse/ETL experience with Informatica or Abinitio (preferred) or other ETL platforms/tools
Exposure to Big Data technologies, ideally in an HDFS environment
Teradata Data Warehouse experience is preferred
Written/verbal communication skills
Ability/willingness to learn new skills

Required Qualifications
1-3+ years' experience in Data Warehousing.
1-3+ years of hands on ETL (e.g., Informatica/DataStage) experience
1-3+ years of Teradata experience or related Appliance
1-3+ years' experience working in a cross-functional environment
Strong work ethic evening and weekend hours may be required.
Excellent oral and written communications skills; ability to interact effectively with all levels within the organization
Working knowledge of SDLC methodology
Excellent analytical and problem solving skills
Ability to interact and work effectively with technical & non-technical levels within the organization
Ability to drive clarity of purpose and goals during release and planning activities
Excellent organizational skills including ability to prioritize tasks efficiently with high level of attention to detail

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission:
Net2Source, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. Net2Source, Inc. is committed to ensuring equal employment opportunities for all candidates and employees. Hiring decisions are solely based upon job related criteria regardless of race, ethnicity, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), marital status, disability, age, national origin, political affiliation, retaliation, parental status, military service, other non-merit factor or any other status protected by U.S. law.

With Regards,
Maninder Kaur
Net2Source Inc.
Global HQ Address 7250 Dallas Pkwy, Suite 825 Plano, Texas 75024
Office: (201) 340-8700 x 408 | Cell: 201-479-1137| Fax: (201) 221-8131| Email: mani@net2source.com

Fast Facts about Net2Source:

Inception in 2007, privately held, Debt free
2200+ employees globally
375+ In- house Team of Sales, Account Management and Recruitment with coast to coast COE.
30 offices in US and 50+ Offices globally
Operations in 20 countries (US, Canada, Mexico, APAC, UK, UAE, Europe, Latin America, Japan, Australia)

Awards and Accolades:
2018 Fastest Growing IT Staffing Firm in North America by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 Fastest-Growing Private Companies in America as a 5 times consecutive honoree Inc. 5000
2018 - Spirit of Alliance Award by Agile1
2018 - 40 Under 40 Leadership Awards by Triangle Business Journal
2018 Fastest 50 by NJBIZ
2018 TechServe Excellence Award (IT and Engineering Staffing)
2018 Best of the Best Platinum Award by Agile1
2018 40 Under 40 Award Winner by Staffing Industry Analysts
2018 CEO World Gold Award by SVUS
2017 Best of the Best Gold Award by Agile1,Job Description:

At EmployBridge, we are seeking a Senior Data Analyst to support the design, development, integration and implementation of an analytic environment. Your talents, perspectives, and efforts will contribute directly to the production of valuable intelligence to facilitate positive change across the company. This position is for people who looking for exciting, fast-paced, and dynamically evolving data and analytics field, including data warehousing, reporting/dashboarding, machine learning and emerging technologies. Senior Data Analysts are obsessed with getting their hands on data from across the enterprise and providing intuitive analysis and visualizations that will be used to solve business problems by enabling data-driven decision-making. This role works both independently and with a dedicated team.

Responsibilities:
Drive an understanding and adherence to the principles of data quality management including metadata, lineage, and business definitions
Work collaboratively with appropriate teams to manage security and data access governance
Build well-managed data solutions, tools, and capabilities to enable self-service frameworks for data consumers
Partner with the business to translate the business needs to design and develop tools, techniques, metrics, and dashboards for insights and data visualization
Understand, facilitate, and influence data domain processes.
Recommend improvements to data architectures to maximize business capabilities
Partner with Data Engineering to create dimensional models for data warehousing and provide data for dashboards and reporting
Work collaboratively with others within and outside of his or her function to achieve goals, improve processes, and optimize system design
Curate a large body of reports in internal reporting application, designing new SQL queries per business requirements and updating existing reports
Collaborate with stakeholders such as business leaders, project leads to gather data requirements and deliver projects on time
Very strong in SQL, writing complex queries for reporting and maintaining database objects
Experience in Python, R or other scripting languages
Advanced knowledge of data architecture patterns for data warehousing, and familiarity with data modeling for applications
Leverage Data Mining techniques to find key business insights
Collaborate with Product Managers to explore new product ideas or enhancements
Build reporting to measure progress in key initiatives
Have team first mentality by demonstrating personal commitment to the team by being cooperative, collaborative, and flexible
Qualifications, Education and Experience:
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science or technical equivalent; Master’s preferred
Knowledge of industry leading data management practices
Basic knowledge of cloud platforms such as Azure, AWS
4+ years using modern BI tools (Power BI, Tableau, Qlik, MicroStrategy)
Experience with ETL/ELT tools (Informatica, Talend)
Experience with modern, various databases& data store tools (Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, DB2, Redshift, RDS, DocumentDB, S3)
Experience with database administration and data warehousing
Experience with leveraging data governance frameworks and establishing methodologies
Experience in related data applications and tools such as SAS, Informatica
High degree of initiative and capacity to lead multiple priorities of significant scope in a fast-paced environment
Knowledge of data architecture and technology solutions
Job Skills:
Proficient in SQL, Oracle, and/or Microsoft SQL Server
Familiar with UNIX/LINUX shell scripting
Strong skills with DAX and MDX in support of business solutions
Hands-on experience with leading analytic tools and methods
Experience in developing data pipelines and familiar with Cloud technologies
Experience and familiarity with statistical techniques and models
Strong experience with data modeling, data lineage, data warehousing and data marts
Proficient personal organization, productivity, and time management skills
Demonstrable confidence and enthusiasm about technology, innovation and problem solving
Strong team player and mindset
Desire to acquire and share new knowledge, skills, and abilities
Who are we?

At EmployBridge, we are America's Workforce Specialists. We're the largest light industrial staffing company in the United States and a preeminent resource for professional staffing. We offer local expertise and service through our nearly 600 branches and provide a full range of employment solutions to companies nationwide!

EmployBridge/Select Staffing is an equal opportunity employer. We evaluate qualified applicants without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, and other legally protected characteristics.,Job Description
Skills

· Data Analysis and Profiling

· SAS/SQL

· Tableau

· Process/Technical Documentation Expertise

Day to Day Responsibilities

· Testing

· Validation

· Deep Dive Data Analysis

Description

· Partners with key stakeholders in the business to identify, assess, aggregate and document risks and controls, including risks associated with new or modified products, services, distribution channels, regulations and third party operations. May present findings to various levels of leadership. Communicates results of risk assessments to governance committees, business process owners and various levels of leadership.

· Implements new risk policies, practices, appetites and solutions to ensure holistic understanding and management of risks according to industry best practice. Enhances strategies, tools, and methodologies to measure, monitor, and report risks.

· Applies advanced knowledge to utilize or produce analytical material for discussions with cross-functional teams to understand business objectives and influence solution strategies.

· Serves as key contributor in cross-functional teams to identify, assess, aggregate and mitigate current and emerging risk events.

· Effectively contributes to projects that impact the organization.

· Formulates stress test plans for a line of business or the enterprise including the evaluation of results and framing of contingency plans in partnership with key business stakeholders.
Company Description
Who We Are:
Peyton Resource Group (PRG) has a 17-year track record of delivering real results for our clients. With offices in Dallas, San Antonio and Austin, PRG is an innovative industry leader utilizing the latest technology to drastically reduce the time-to-hire problem plaguing most companies today.
What We Do: We innovate. We understand. We collaborate. We move forward. We get IT done.

How We Do It:
We partner with world-class organizations that offer exciting career paths to their employees.
We cultivate relationships with the best and brightest talent in the marketplace.
We leverage technology in a way that is helping to redefine the staffing industry.
Our Results: We solve today's critical staffing challenges, while delivering best-of-class professionals to our clients.,Job Description


Job #: 1074072

Apex Systems is seeking a Data Analyst for a 6 month contract with one of our top financial clients in Plano, Texas! Please apply via the medium in which you are viewing this posting, or email your resume to Sara Clagett, Technical Recruiter, at sclagett@apexsystems.com. Apply today!

Title: Data Analyst

Location: Plano, TX

Duration: 6 month contract

Compensation: Dependent upon experience

Responsibilities:
Perform quantitative and qualitative analysis of econometric data, relating constants and variables, restrictions, alternatives, conflicting objectives, and their numerical parameters.
Define data requirements and gather and validate information, applying judgment and statistical tests.
Develop data structures to support the generation of business insights and strategy. -Maintain data infrastructure and develop scripts for regular processes.
Design and develop operational data analysis and visualization tools, techniques, metrics, and dashboards to meet business needs.
Analyze data analysis requests obtained from management to determine operational problems and define data modeling requirements, validation of content, and problem solving parameters.
Identify opportunities to use data to develop new strategies and improve business performance and utilize knowledge of mathematical modeling and other optimization methods to perform quantitative and qualitative data analysis.
Communicate and present data to management by developing reports using Tableau or Business Intelligence tools.
Qualifications:
Master's degree or foreign equivalent in Operations Research, Business Administration, Statistics, Mathematics, Economics, Finance, Analytics, Engineering, Science, or a related quantitative analytical field and the following skill set through education or work experience:
Quantitative and qualitative analysis developing reports using Tableau or Business Intelligence tools (GG Plot, MATLAB, Python, D3, Jupiter, or R Shiny)
scripting tools (Python, Perl, JavaScript, or Shell)
SQL
data warehouses, structured data environments, unstructured data environments, PIG, HIVE, or Impala
EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Analyst - Senior in Plano, TX.

Daily Responsibilities:
Work as liaison between Solution Architects, Tech leads/Developers and business POCs, gather and document requirements on wiki
Data analysis/reverse engineering
REQUIREMENTS:

Top three skills in the order of importance:
Detail oriented data/business analyst: 10+ years
Communication skills (knows technical and business terms and can translate between business and IT): 10+ years
Data Warehouse Concepts: 10+ years
Nice to have:
Data modeling
Data architecture
Financial business domain knowledge
Three top technology tools that this resource must have knowledge using:
SQL and development on main database platforms (Oracle, DB2, SQL Server, Hive) and nice to have (Netezza, Snowflake)
ETL tools (Informatica, Datastage, Spark, etc.)
Big Data tools - Hadoop, AWS S3
Nice to have:
Tableau/Business objects
SAS
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,JOB DESCRIPTION:
Summary
Will work alongside RnD staff to extract, process, plot and interpret data collected from variety of chemical and sensor experiments. Data may also come from deployed sensor networks.

Required Skillsets
• Seeking 1-5 years of experience in Data collection and analytics
• BS or equivalent in CS, Electrical Engineering, Data Sciences. Candidates should have a range of courses on statistics, SPC and databases
• Comfortable with python programming
• Experience with JMP and interpreting / working with Matlab
• Experience with Excel and Powerpoint would be desirable
• A team player

CONTACT INFORMATION:
Sandra Montes
Sandra@OSIEngineering.com
220.2800 x 108
OSIJOBS,Data and User Acceptance Test Analyst

The successful candidate will have the opportunity to work with our client, a multinational IT company specialized in consumer products (hardware & software) and services.

Location: Cupertino, CA

Duration: 8-month contract with possibility of renewal.

Candidate must be eligible for direct W2 contract.

Job Descriptions:

The Data and UA Test Analyst will be responsible of managing data analytic implementation and testing projects.

Job Requirements:
Technical Degree in related fields
Experience in data and User Acceptance testing.
Project management - experience in managing / leading projects.
Good analytical skills with Tableau and MS Excel.
Experience in Python scripting.
Excellent and effective communications.
Why Kelly®?


As a worker today, its up to you to take charge of your career and look for opportunities to learn, grow, and achieve your potential. Helping you find whats next is what were all about. We know whats going on in the evolving world of workjust ask the nearly 500,000 people we employ each year. Connecting with us means getting the support, guidance, and opportunities needed to take your career where you may have never imagined.

About Kelly®


At Kelly, were always thinking about whats next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, were a leading advocate for temporary/nontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world.

Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.
#KellyGTS

]],Location: Cupertino, CADuration: 3 Months

Duties:

Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling. Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus. Reporting and presentation skills a must. Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers. The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions. Work closely with the Data Analytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven markeitng reports.
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
Filter and clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.
Candidates MUST be fluent in German

Job Requirements:

Skills:

MacOS

iOS

0 - 2 years of experience.

Education:

Bachelor's Degree or equivalent work experience preferred.

Skills Required:
Data Analyst
Languages:

English (Speak, Read, Write)

Norwegian (Speak, Read, Write)

As an equal opportunity employer, ICONMA prides itself on creating an employment environment that supports and encourages the abilities of all persons regardless of race, color, gender, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or disability.,Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Sunnyvale, CA+ salary:$30 - $49 per hour+ date posted:Thursday, July 2, 2020+ job type:Contract+ industry:Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services+ reference:788444**job description**Data Analystjob summary:**Job Duties:**Analyze, document and design data objects, data quality rules, and data quality tests to be landed and executed. Create resilient, and sustainable and Data Object Designs and Data Quality Rules. Be a product-oriented Data Analyst creating and experimenting with new ideas that will engage and excite our customerslocation: Sunnyvale, Californiajob type: Contractsalary: $30 - 49 per hourwork hours: 8am to 5pmeducation: Bachelorsresponsibilities:**Experience/Skills required:**+ Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or related technical field. MS/PhD would be a strong plus.+ 3+ years experience in Data Design, Dimensional Modelling, Teradata, HiveQL, Hadoop HDFS, Confluence, Jira.+ Strong understanding of data design techniques and principles+ Strong leadership and communication skills+ Must be able to work effectively both on teams as well as be self-motivated, task oriented and organized.+ Strong customer focus and obsession with quality+ Ability to work in a fast-paced and agile development environmentqualifications:**Experience/Skills required:**+ Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or related technical field. MS/PhD would be a strong plus.+ 3+ years experience in Data Design, Dimensional Modelling, Teradata, HiveQL, Hadoop HDFS, Confluence, Jira.+ Strong understanding of data design techniques and principles+ Strong leadership and communication skills+ Must be able to work effectively both on teams as well as be self-motivated, task oriented and organized.+ Strong customer focus and obsession with quality+ Ability to work in a fast-paced and agile development environmentskills: **Experience/Skills required:**+ Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or related technical field. MS/PhD would be a strong plus.+ 3+ years experience in Data Design, Dimensional Modelling, Teradata, HiveQL, Hadoop HDFS, Confluence, Jira.+ Strong understanding of data design techniques and principles+ Strong leadership and communication skills+ Must be able to work effectively both on teams as well as be self-motivated, task oriented and organized.+ Strong customer focus and obsession with quality+ Ability to work in a fast-paced and agile development environmentEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.Qualified applicants in San Francisco with criminal histories will be considered for employment in accordance with the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance.We will consider for employment all qualified Applicants, including those with criminal histories, in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable state and local laws, including the City of Los Angeles' Fair Chance Initiative for Hiring Ordinance.,Data AnalystLocation: Sunnyvale, CADuration: 6 monthsPosition Overview:* Development and maintenance support for key data infrastructure supporting the Chrome OS client team, specifically the channel/customer sales teams. The Analyst will have very strong SQL skills, strong time management and self-direction, be comfortable cleaning up tech debt and maintaining pipelines, strong attention to detail, and strong documentation skills.Top 3 Daily ResponsibilitiesSkill/Experience/Education:Mandatory:* 1-3 years developing SQL workflows.* Project management experience.* Must be a strong self-directed contributor.Skill Matrix:Skill Name: SQLLevel: 4Years: 0-3 yearsMandatory: YesDescription: Must have a high level of comfort writing and maintaining SQL pipelinesAs an equal opportunity employer, ICONMA prides itself on creating an employment environment that supports and encourages the abilities of all persons regardless of race, color, gender, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or disability.,We are hiring Data Analyst for our client in Redwood City, CA.

Job Title: Data Analyst

Duration: 12 Months

Job Location: Redwood City, CA
Candidates must have 9+ years of experience.
Candidates preferable USC, GC & H1B.
Job Description:

The ideal candidate will have worked in depth in data analysis, including experience extracting and manipulating data using SQL and Python. The candidate will have the opportunity to redefine the CRM Analytics for Auto Industry which will include data from multiple sources like telematics, campaigns, web, Service OLTP. The candidate will have the full opportunity for showing their creativity by owning the analysis, design and QA of data exploration and ETL. This is a hands-on individual contributor role. The candidate will be part of the Data Engineering team and work very closely with various product and engineering team members including the Product owners, Architect, DBA, and Application developers. To be successful, the candidate will have to be self-driven and a very strong team player.

Principle Responsibilities:
5+ years experience in SQL and manipulating large data sets in a database
2+ years of expertise of data analysis using Python, Spark in AWS Cluster.
2+ year of expertise analyzing and developing ETL data map for Oracle DB as source and target.
5+ year of QA expertise in ensuring quality of data in Data Warehouse loaded from various data sources.
Preferred expertise in building key data pipelines using AWS analytical services like S3, EC2, EMR, Glue, Athena.
2+ year of experience in working with DBA team to fix query performance issues in Oracle Data Warehouse.
2+ year of experience in providing production support for any data quality issues in Data Warehouse.
Expert level knowledge of both OLTP and Dimensional schema.
Excited to learn new technologies and analytical methodologies relating to business intelligence and data analysis.
Bonus Skills:
Knowledge of AWS cloud configuration.
Knowledge of full and incremental ETL using Informatica Power Center.
Knowledge of multi-tenant data warehouse for SaaS.
Application Requirements:
Interested candidates should submit resume/CV in both plaintext and PDF format, including desired salary range.
BS in Engineering and 10+ years development experience.
Position is on-site in the Redwood City/Redwood Shores area of California.
Thanks & Regards,

Raghu Singh,PDS Tech, Inc. is seeking a Data Analyst, in Cupertino, CA.Summary:
• Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling.
• Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus.
• Reporting and presentation skills a must. Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers.
• The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions.
• Work closely with the Data Anlytics team and cross functionally in marketing to produce monthly & quarterly data driven marketing reports.
• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
• Filter and clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.

Requirement:
• Candidates MUST be fluent in German.
Skills required:
• Data Analyst
• MacOS
• iOS
• 0 - 2 years of experience.
Education:
• Bachelor's Degree or equivalent work experience preferred.

PDS Tech, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, veteran status, age, marital status, pregnancy, genetic information, or other legally protected status.

Founded in 1977, PDS Tech, Inc. is one of the nation's premier specialty staffing firms with 31 offices nationwide. We offer a full range of benefits including:

• Health insurance
• Paid holidays
• Weekly payroll
• Immediate 401(k) eligibility
• Completion Bonuses
• Training
• Please note availability of benefits may vary by position

PDS specializes in Engineering and IT arenas including Aerospace, Defense, Electronics, Telecommunications, Automotive, and Energy just to name a few. Our reputation, track record, and years of continuous growth reflect the commitment to quality that our employees and clients experience first-hand. To find out more about PDS, please visit www.pdstech.com

$$$ PDS pays for referrals! $$$

Job Requirements:,Job Description
Accounting Principals is hiring a Data Analyst for a six month project in San Jose, CA. As an Engineering Operations Data analyst you will collect, monitor and analyze data/ This includes financial Forecasts and budgets, contracts and purchasing.

Responsibilities:
Assess financial status by analyzing actual results in comparison with forecasts
Produce reports, which include key metric trends, financial results, and variance reporting to engineering leaders
Lead budgeting and forecasting processes for the engineering departments
Support engineering leaders with managing contracts and purchasing for equipment, services and contractors
Optimize contract management processes for the engineering departments
Assemble and summarize data on operational metrics such as cost of services, project accounting, and product quality
Develop data models, perform analysis, identify trends and risks, and recommend actions on operational metrics
Skills:
2+ years of relevant experience in corporate business or financial planning & analysis, or other related fields
Proficient in spreadsheets, data models and large datasets
Hands on experience with statistical analysis
Excellent analytical and problem solving skills
Outstanding verbal and written communication skills
Bachelor’s degree in business, economics, computer science or similar experience
Employment Type: Temporary, 40 hours per week
Company Description
Allow us to introduce ourselves, We're Accounting Principals--a leader in finance and accounting staffing. In fact, since 2010, we've been part of Adecco Group, a Global 500 company and leader in staffing services around the world. But this isn't staffing as usual. We take quite a different approach than most staffing agencies. A people-focused approach. We believe in forming real relationships with both our clients and our candidates. We want to understand the needs on both sides. It's not enough to match a resume to a job opening. We want to find the right balance between skills and requirements, career goals and business objectives, and personality and team culture. That way, everyone wins.

Equal Opportunity Employer/Veterans/Disabled
To read our Candidate Privacy Information Statement, which explains how we will use your information, please visit https://www.accountingprincipals.com/privacy-policy/
The Company will consider qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records.,Job Summary:
Company: Artech Information Systems LLC
Position: Data Analyst
Duration: 12 months with possible extension
Location: Sunnyvale, CA
Job Reference Code: 20-23449

Position Overview:
Development and maintenance support for key data infrastructure supporting the GTM team, specifically the channel/customer sales teams. The Analyst will have very strong SQL skills, strong time management and self-direction, be comfortable cleaning up tech debt and maintaining pipelines, strong attention to detail, and strong documentation skills.

Skill/Experience/Education
Mandatory: 1-3 years developing SQL workflows.
Project management experience.
Must be a strong self-directed contributor.
Niyaz Ansari
Assistant Manager – Staffing
Artech Information Systems LLC
360 Mt. Kemble Avenue, Suite 2000 | Morristown, NJ 07960
Office: 973.967-3588 | Fax: 973.998.2599
Email: Niyaz.Ansari@artechinfo.com | Website: www.artechinfo.com
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/niyazansari/

Connect with us on - LinkedIn | Facebook | Twitter

About Artech Information Systems LLC
Artech is an employer-of-choice for over 5,800 consultants across the globe. We recruit top-notch talent for over 65 Fortune and Government clients coast-to-coast across the U.S., India, and China. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us!
Want to read more about Artech?
Click here to visit our website or click on the following links to read what others are saying about us: The Wall Street Journal, Forbes (1) (2), BusinessWire, Entrepreneur, Better Business Bureau, Hoovers, Diversity Careers(1) (2), The Artech Circle, NJTVOnline, The Business Forum Show, and SIA: “Above the Crowd.”
Connect with Artech through Social Media
Learn more about our company including the latest events at Artech, new job opportunities, jobseeker tips, and more. Follow us on Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Twitter, and YouTube.\,Data Analyst
If you are a Data Analyst with experience, please read on!

Job Title: Data Analyst
Job Locations: Redwood City, CA
Job Type: $45-$50/hr
Requirements:
1.) 3+ years experience creating dashboards in Business Intelligence (BI) tools (i.e. Tableau)
2.) Experience writing code in Python, R or similar language
3.) Bachelor's Degree
4.) Experience writing SQL Queries, and Excel Formulas
What You Will Be Doing
As a member of our team, you will be writing code that is readable in flat files, and processing data in several different ways and you will responsible for summarizing data results into files, charts, and graphs.
What You Need for this Position
Requirements:
1.) 3+ years experience creating dashboards in Business Intelligence (BI) tools (i.e. Tableau)
2.) Experience writing code in Python, R or similar language
3.) Bachelor's Degree
4.) Experience writing SQL Queries, and Excel Formulas

Preferred Skills:
1.) Salesforce experience
2.) Healthcare/Health Plan Analytics experience
What's In It for You
- Competitive Compensation $40 - $50/hr
- Benefits (Medical, Dental)
- PTO
So, if you are a Data Analyst with experience, please apply today!
-
Applicants must be authorized to work in the U.S.


CyberCoders, Inc is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer

All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.

Your Right to Work In compliance with federal law, all persons hired will be required to verify identity and eligibility to work in the United States and to complete the required employment eligibility verification document form upon hire.,Job DescriptionUS Tech Solutions is seeking a Data Analyst for a Long Term contract with a client in Sunnyvale, CA

Core Functions include:
• Design and build reports, scorecards and dashboards to support all Compliance functions.
• Generate insights, trends and actionable recommendations to support Operations, Product and Business teams.
• Generate reports and create presentations for key stakeholders, including Compliance and Executive leadership team.

Position Description:
• This position is part of Analytics team responsible for performing analytics to support the business. An individual in this position is expected to perform additional responsibilities and duties as assigned and/or necessary.
• Analyze and interpret information related to risk mitigation by identifying industry data trends (ex: reputational metrics, seller scorecard indicators) and benchmarks.
• Analyze data to identify trends, patterns, insights, and discrepancies in data; ensure data accuracy, synthesize compliance data in support of strategic business objectives; translate results into actionable recommendations/plans.
• Utilize industry new technologies and best practices to provide insights to key stakeholders based on your research.
• Communicate compliance data insights and global trends related to the business; design, coordinate, and implement new reporting, analysis, and data-management solutions; provide recommendations based on insights and research.
• Propose improvements for strategic and tactical initiatives (ex: driving experience scores, risk mitigation measures).
• This role is required to work in both San Bruno (Temporarily replaced by San Mateo) and Sunnyvale locations.

Minimum Qualifications:
• Bachelor's degree in Statistics, Analytics, Mathematics, Systems, Information Technology, Computer Science, or related field.
• 2+ years experience in analytics, systems, information technology (IT), data management.
• 1+ year experience with Python/R (Python preferred).
• 1+ year experience in Tableau/Looker or any other visualization tools (Tableau preferred).
• Knowledge on predictive modeling is a plus.
• Experience with Hadoop, Hive, Spark, Kafka.
• 2+ year experience with SQL, RDBMS, Hive and No-SQL databases (for example Cassandra) is a plus.
• Masters degree or certificate in business analytics, data mining, or statistical analysis is a strong plus.
Prior eCommerce experience is a plus.

About US Tech Solutions:

Your talent, our opportunities - This is the premise behind US Tech Solutions.

You have the skill we have the opportunity. As a team, we work passionately for you to get the right career opportunity across industry verticals and functions. For past sixteen years, leading Global

Companies and Fortune 500 come to us to get the right talent. Whether you want to work as full-time, contractor or part-time, technical or non-technical our talent consultants will connect with the right career opportunity globally.

Connect with our talent team today.

USTECH was founded in 2000 by Manoj Agarwal. Today, we are a global firm offering talent solutions to 150 customers including 20% of Fortune 500 across Financial Services, Healthcare, Life Sciences, Aerospace, Energy, Retail, Telecom, Technology, Manufacturing, and Engineering. We are headquartered in New Jersey with 40 global locations across the USA, Canada, Europe, and India. Deloitte has recognized USTECH as one of the fastest growing private businesses for the past five consecutive years and INC 500 for the past three. We have also been rated The Top Business in the US" by Diversity Business since 2011. To learn more about how US Tech Solutions visit our website: www.ustechsolutions.com.

US Tech is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply."

Apply: Interested candidates are requested to send their resume to Pawan at pawans@ustechsolutionsinc.com

Job Requirements:

Job Description

US Tech Solutions is seeking a Data Analyst for a Long Term contract with a client in Sunnyvale, CA

Core Functions include:
• Design and build reports, scorecards and dashboards to support all Compliance functions.
• Generate insights, trends and actionable recommendations to support Operations, Product and Business teams.
• Generate reports and create presentations for key stakeholders, including Compliance and Executive leadership team.

Position Description:
• This position is part of Analytics team responsible for performing analytics to support the business. An individual in this position is expected to perform additional responsibilities and duties as assigned and/or necessary.
• Analyze and interpret information related to risk mitigation by identifying industry data trends (ex: reputational metrics, seller scorecard indicators) and benchmarks.
• Analyze data to identify trends, patterns, insights, and discrepancies in data; ensure data accuracy, synthesize compliance data in support of strategic business objectives; translate results into actionable recommendations/plans.
• Utilize industry new technologies and best practices to provide insights to key stakeholders based on your research.
• Communicate compliance data insights and global trends related to the business; design, coordinate, and implement new reporting, analysis, and data-management solutions; provide recommendations based on insights and research.
• Propose improvements for strategic and tactical initiatives (ex: driving experience scores, risk mitigation measures).
• This role is required to work in both San Bruno (Temporarily replaced by San Mateo) and Sunnyvale locations.

Minimum Qualifications:
• Bachelor's degree in Statistics, Analytics, Mathematics, Systems, Information Technology, Computer Science, or related field.
• 2+ years experience in analytics, systems, information technology (IT), data management.
• 1+ year experience with Python/R (Python preferred).
• 1+ year experience in Tableau/Looker or any other visualization tools (Tableau preferred).
• Knowledge on predictive modeling is a plus.
• Experience with Hadoop, Hive, Spark, Kafka.
• 2+ year experience with SQL, RDBMS, Hive and No-SQL databases (for example Cassandra) is a plus.
• Masters degree or certificate in business analytics, data mining, or statistical analysis is a strong plus.
• Prior eCommerce experience is a plus.,Global Tech Company is looking for a Data Analyst to join the team!Responsibilities:
• Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports.
• Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality.
• Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems.
• Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets.
• Filter and clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems.
• Work with management to prioritize business and information needs.
• Locate and define new process improvement opportunities.

Qualification:

• Fluency in German
• Strong data and analytic skills, knowledge of excel, numbers and data modeling.
• Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a plus.
• Reporting and presentation skills a must.
• Looking for a person who has a passion for data and numbers.
• The successful candidate will turn data into information and insights that will help support business decisions.

Apply today to be considered!

Job Requirements:,Ref ID: 00420-9502600417Classification: Data Analyst

Compensation: DOE

Emphasis query codes experience. Python, R and SQL.
BA with coding experience. Data transformation

Please send resumes to Trupti Deshpande.

Job Requirements:
This individual will create, run, maintain and review a variety of reports including enrollment/sales, forecast, grading, business trend, and financial. The position requires a strong understanding of systems, applications, and data structure with an ability report solutions for evolving business needs. This individual should thrive in a fast-paced, collaborative and dynamic environment. • Data transformation experience with Python libraries such as Numpy, SciPy and pandas • Successfully and quickly fulfill requests for development of ad-hoc reports. • Quickly learn business and system data structures for customized applications.

Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/technology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,Job Description


Job #: 1075618

Apex Systems is searching for an experienced Data Analyst to fill a contract role with our Fortune 500 client in Menlo Park, CA!

Data Analyst

Location: Menlo Park, CA

Contract Length: 12 months

Pay Rate: $51.75/hour

Commerce Partnerships Data Analyst Contractor

The data analyst will be responsible for building reporting and dashboards, and act as a knowledgeable liaison between technical teams and business stakeholders. The ideal candidate has experience with building data pipelines and dashboards and will be comfortable working through ambiguity by using data. This is a contractor role for a year and is located in our Menlo Park office.

Responsibilities
Create data tools that track key indicators and unlock insights for performance
Developing dashboards and pipelines to allow for quick and accurate data access and reporting across different lines of business
Define key metrics and provide analytical support, KPIs visibility, and business trends/drivers support via SQL, reporting and data visualization tools
Communicate with cross-functional stakeholders, including Product, Engineering, and business stakeholders, to drive dashboard design and key metrics analysis
Be a key point of contact for business stakeholders on all questions & related requests
Minimum Qualifications
BA or BS degree
2+ years of experience working in an analytical capacity developing insights, defining metrics, and making recommendations
SQL experience (Oracle, Vertica, Hive, etc.) or relational database experience (Oracle, MySQL) including developing data pipelines and reporting automation
Experience building data visualization tools and pipelines on large datasets and multiple data sources to create compelling, actionable reporting and dashboards like Tableau
Experience in financial modeling, ROI analysis, data analysis, and experience seeing beyond numbers to drive sound decision-making from complex datasets
Proven stakeholder management experience – including multiple cross-functional
Presentation and communications experience with extracting insights from technical data sets to varied audiences including communicating with senior management
Preferred Qualifications
2+ years of experience with packages such as Python, R, SAS, etc
Experience with creating dashboards forecasting
EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Data and User Acceptance Test Analyst The successful candidate will have the opportunity to work with our client, a multinational IT company specialized in consumer products (hardware software) and services. Location Cupertino, CA Duration 8-month contract with possibility of renewal. Candidate must be eligible for direct W2 contract. Job Descriptions The Data and UA Test Analyst will be responsible of managing data analytic implementation and testing projects. Job Requirements Technical Degree in related fields Experience in data and User Acceptance testing. Project management - experience in managing leading projects. Good analytical skills with Tableau and MS Excel. Experience in Python scripting. Excellent and effective communications. Why Kelly Registered ? As a worker today, it's up to you to take charge of your career and look for opportunities to learn, grow, and achieve your potential. Helping you find what's next is what we're all about. We know what's going on in the evolving world of work-just ask the nearly 500,000 people we employ each year. Connecting with us means getting the support, guidance, and opportunities needed to take your career where you may have never imagined. About Kelly Registered At Kelly, we're always thinking about what's next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, we're a leading advocate for temporarynontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world. Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law. KellyGTS,Data and User Acceptance Test Analyst

The successful candidate will have the opportunity to work with our client, a multinational IT company specialized in consumer products (hardware & software) and services.

Location: Cupertino, CA

Duration: 8-month contract with possibility of renewal.

Candidate must be eligible for direct W2 contract.

Job Descriptions:

The Data and UA Test Analyst will be responsible of managing data analytic implementation and testing projects.

Job Requirements:

Technical Degree in related fields
Experience in data and User Acceptance testing.
Project management - experience in managing / leading projects.
Good analytical skills with Tableau and MS Excel.
Experience in Python scripting.
Excellent and effective communications.

Why Kelly ® ?
As a worker today, its up to you to take charge of your career and look for opportunities to learn, grow, and achieve your potential. Helping you find whats next is what were all about. We know whats going on in the evolving world of workjust ask the nearly 500,000 people we employ each year. Connecting with us means getting the support, guidance, and opportunities needed to take your career where you may have never imagined.

About Kelly ®

At Kelly , were always thinking about whats next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, were a leading advocate for temporary/nontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world.

Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law. #KellyGTS ]],Position: Data Analyst - Redwood City via Company Shuttle!
Location: Peninsula Area
Starts: Within 2+ weeks
Duration: 9+ Months
Status: Freelance (40 hours a week)
Rate: $47/hr. - $53/hr. (DOE)

The Bay Area's best-known search engine giant is seeking a Data Analyst to assist their team.

Top Responsibilities:
-Build and maintain data pipelines and scripts that support pipelines.
-Build and maintain dashboards that report on key model performance metrics.
-Additional statistical analysis providing insight into program change impact and key metrics.

Ideal Qualifications:
-SQL, R or Python
-MS/MA Degree
-Technical concentration (Mathematics, statistics, physics, engineering, computer science, etc.)
-2 years relevant experience
-Understanding of machine learning models

This is an onsite freelance contract in Redwood City. Public Transportation accessible via company shuttle.

Submit resume (and samples if applicable) to: cc223@jobalert.creativecircle.com,Description/Comment:Responsibilities includes but not limited to: Data management Reporting Operational excellence document preparation Maintaining millions of rows of customer and product data Streamlining new processes Identifying areas of automation Working closely with client stakeholders to train on, or develop processes Cross cultural communication

Additional Job Details:Basic Qualifications 2 year experience in sales or data reporting roles 2 year experience in Excel and/or Google Sheets 2 year of public speaking, in client setting,Position: Data Analyst (Fluent in German)
Location: South Bay
Starts: Within a Couple Weeks
Duration: 3+ Months
Status: Freelance (40 hours a week)
Rate: Up to $30/hr (DOE)

One of the HOTTEST companies in the Bay Area is seeking a Data Analyst to assist their team.

Responsibilities:
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Develop and implement databases, data collection systems, data analytics and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Acquire data from primary or secondary data sources and maintain databases/data systems
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets
Filter and clean data by reviewing computer reports, printouts, and performance indicators to locate and correct code problems
Skills/Qualifications:
MUST be able to read, write, and speak fluently in German
Excel, numbers and data modeling
0-2 years of experience
Knowledge of or experience working on subscription businesses a PLUS
Strong data and analytical skills
This Data Analyst role is an onsite freelance opportunity 40 hours per week in Cupertino - accessible via company shuttle.

Submit resume (and samples if applicable) to: cc223@jobalert.creativecircle.com,Data Analyst III

Location: Redwood City, CA
Duration: 12 months

Description:
Project Overview:
Analyze business operations, tools and trends. Building dashboards, sql queries, scripts and pipelines to support development of insights. Quickly translating analytical asks into insights for management.
Overall Responsibilities:
We are cross-functional data science team looking for strong technical candidates with business acumen. The ideal candidate has experience working with various stages of data analysis: data querying, building reporting pipelines, running statistical analysis, building dashboards. Should be a self-starter that can 'crunch the numbers', be organized and detail-oriented, partner with senior stakeholders, and communicate effectively.
Top 3 Daily Responsibilities:
Analyze business operations, tools and trends. Building dashboards, sql queries, scripts and pipelines to support development of insights. Quickly translating analytical asks into insights for management.

Skill/Experience/Education:
Mandatory:

SQL Education and Experience - MS/MA Degree Required - technical concentration (Mathematics, statistics, physics, engineering, computer science, etc.) 2yrs relevant experience Understanding of machine learning models
Desired:
R or Python experience, PhD with technical concentration (Mathematics, statistics, physics, engineering, computer science, etc.) 2yrs experience as a data analyst or data scientist position

As an equal opportunity employer, ICONMA prides itself on creating an employment environment that supports and encourages the abilities of all persons regardless of race, color, gender, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or disability.,Information Security Data and Reporting Analyst
Location: Glendale, AZ

Overall 10+ years' experience
The Information Security Data Analyst is responsible for safeguarding organizational information assets through data analysis, and development and maintenance of metrics to measure the effectiveness of the information security function. This position will produce reporting through data analysis to come up with actionable items to help Management make informed data-based decisions.

Essential Duties and Responsibilities:

Uses a combination of software tools, statistical analysis, critical thinking, programming and/or scripting, and web research to analyze large, complex sets of data related to Information Security data, including vulnerability and compliance scans.
Conducts routine and ad hoc data extraction, analysis, charting, and reporting to inform data-based decision making for management.
Extracts & integrates information security data from multiple sources to produce requested or required data elements and analyses.
Identifies analyzes and interprets trends, patterns, and outliers in complex data.
Quantifies the impact and assesses the severity of data issues.
Proposes and assists in the development of innovative ways of presenting complex data and metrics.
Partners with business and functional units to create and maintain the info security metrics.
Creates/Maintains vulnerability scans, and then analyze data and integrate into reporting and dashboard creation.
Proven ability to successfully partner with internal clients and vendors to align strategy with deliverables, identify business challenges and develop alternatives to mitigate.

Job Specifications:
Expert in Information Security Data Analytics.
Hands-on Experience in working in a Data warehouse environment.
Experience with SQL/PLSQL and DataMart concepts.
Strong knowledge of analytical, data reporting tools & techniques, prioritizing and problem-solving skills.
Strong written, oral, and interpersonal communication skills.
Ability to present ideas in user-friendly language to a variety of constituent audiences.
Domain Knowledge of Insurance - (Property and Casualty) along with Information Security.
Ability to develop positive and collaborative relationships with business partners and effectively communicate with both business and technology data stakeholders.
Capture, develop, and document data definitions, business rules, and data quality requirements
Worked on Security system analysis, development, and database analysis
Create reports and data-driven presentations with impact. Identify trends and occurrences in data and translate findings into various mediums, including text, charts, graphs, displays and tables.
Interpret data, analyze results, and provide insights for creating Metrics and Dashboard Wireframes.
Develop reports and deliverables for management.
Identify and define data quality and reporting improvements.,Job Description


Job #: 1071937

Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst Opportunity!!

Apex Systems is currently looking to hire a Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst for a large tech company. Please email an updated resume to eengelen@apexsystems.com if you are interested. Thank you!

JOB DETAILS
Location: Menlo Park, 94025
Shifts / Hours: Full time, standard business hours M-F

Rate: $51.09/hr

Description for Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst:

A large tech company is currently searching for a seasoned professional to work in Finance to be part of the Marketing Sourcing team. This person will work closely with multiple business groups driving strategic sourcing strategies. They will be analyzing data for media services that support the business to ensure financial compliance. To make sure contract terms are enforced and business teams understand where they can extract additional value from their vendors.

Job Responsibilities for Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst:
Clean and analyze various data points based on commercial contracts terms and sourcing activities for our Strategic Sourcing Manager for Media.
Review commercial contract terms and develop plan to ensure financial contract compliance through review of POs, invoices, weekly/monthly financial reports from vendors that cover media spent and staff plan utilization.
Engage in frequent verbal and written communications with the internal and vendor’s teams.
Support sourcing projects including preparing RFx’s, managing competitive bids, obtaining quotes, negotiating, examining and analyzing bids and proposals, etc.
Ensure business activities and contracts comply with internal policies and guidelines.
Specific project work will vary including various sourcing and source-to-pay activities
Skills Needed for Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst:
Extensive knowledge and experience with data analysis and understanding of commercial contract financial terms
Must be comfortable working in a fast-paced environment with frequent tight deadlines under minimal supervision and must also be comfortable working collaboratively, efficiently and effectively with both internal clients and external vendors
Experience partnering with a team of channel, retail, e-commerce, marketing, sales, and product development teams to develop and build alignment around long- and short-term vendor strategies
Proven track record of implementing process improvement initiatives based on data analysis
Required Qualifications for Strategic Sourcing Data Analyst:
4+ years’ experience in supply chain, procurement, or finance
BS degree in related field
Once again, if interested send updated copy of resume to eengelen@apexsystems.com and I'll give you a call to talk more. We can get you submitted for this role today!

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Hi,

Â

This is Bharat from Yochana IT Solutions Inc.

Â

We are Yochana is an Award-winning staffing and recruiting agency that provides the top qualified candidates to our clients.Â

Yochana is headquartered in Farmington Hills, Michigan, We are approachable perfectionists who believe in the power of people. We believe strongly in our Commitment to Quality, Competitive Rates, Professionalism, a Rapid Response time, and above all Integrity. We are approachable perfectionists who believe in the power of people. We believe strongly in our Commitment to Quality, Competitive Rates, Professionalism, a Rapid Response time, and above all Integrity.

Â

We are looking for a BI Business/Data Analyst Lead with hands on SQL for our client at Mountain View, CA. Please find the below Job Description and let me know your interest in the position.

Please share the resumes to bharat@yochana.com

For more details, please reach me on 248-599-1102.

Â

Â

Role: BI Business/Data Analyst Lead with hands on SQL

Location : Mountain View CA

No of Roles 3

Â

Â

Short Description:Seasoned BI/Reporting Engineer/developer who is very much hands on with sql development/validation work and has unix/linux + database design experience

Â

Responsibilities:

<u>
Define business requirements and develop complex SQL scripts and reporting solution
Work with accountants and financial analysts to build the next generation reporting solutions
Work with product managers, system owners and data warehouse teams in order to pull relevant data to support financial reporting requirements for your customers and partners
Be a systems expert supporting the Revenue, Partner Payments and Accounting teams
</ul>

Â

Mandatory

Â
4-7 Years of hands on experience working with SQL. - Proficiency with SQL and experience with Unix/Linux systems required - Prior experience in the finance domain, Data Modeling, Developing shell scripts , knowledge of at least one 3g ( Java or Python ) - Experience with reporting tools(e.g. Microstrategy, Business Objects, Cognos etc) and other industrial reporting and analysis platforms.
Desired
Excellent written and oral communication and interpersonal skills - with experience interacting with senior-level executives - Distinctive problem solving and analytical skills with a high degree of analytical rigor
Strong creativity and innovation in discovering actionable results and strategies
Â

Â

Â

Regards,

Bharat Priyadarshan Gunti

Manager â Client Relations

Yochana IT Solutions Inc.

23000 Commerce Dr, Farmington hills, MI-48335

Contact: 248-599-1102 (D)

bharat@yochana.com|| www.yochana.com

Note: This is not an unsolicited mail. If you are not interested in receiving our e-mails then please reply with subject line Remove

Oh! Lord, you are My Righteousness and My Pride

Â,Job Description
Data Analyst

About our client:
Small, growing, established (founded 13 years ago) software company, ~100 employees
60+ different B2B products (mostly web applications) with purchases/downloads in the millions
Distributed/remote team in various cities within the United States
A few clients include Google, Apple, Tesla, Disney, Netflix, Starbucks, NASA
This position is 100% remote/work from home, with a preference for candidates in the Atlanta area. Your future manager is in Atlanta and it would be cool to meet up for coffee sometimes.
This is what you’ll be doing:
Working with your new teammates to wrap your head around our client’s ecosystem
Expanding the company’s analytical capabilities and processes
Implementing foundational analytics practices that will scale
Helping to create a unified view and understanding of the company’s core data
Sharing insights across business stakeholders
Analyzing and interpreting trends/patterns in financial, sales, product, and marketing data
Automating and standardizing reports
Helping with forecasting and other ad hoc requests from leadership
Creating, managing, and maintaining data models in and outside of the data warehouse
Helping to create robust documentation and knowledge training on reports
Developing business metrics and KPI’s, including a data glossary
Managing the report backlog based on requests
What our client is looking for:
3+ years of experience in data analysis, analytics, and reporting
Experience working for a B2B software company or startup is preferred
Strong background analyzing different types of data, including financial, sales, product, marketing
Experience analyzing marketing campaign data would be great
Experience with forecasting and product pricing (for software products/apps) is preferred, even more bonus points for any analysis tied to acquisitions and competitor data/performance
Advanced SQL and Excel skills
Experience working with data warehouses (you’ll have help from the IT team)
Experience with Google Analytics is preferred
Scripting or coding skills in Python or R would be great too
Perks:
Cell phone and internet reimbursement for your home office
Fully covered health insurance
Flexible spending accounts, 401K plan
Working from home every day of your life (did I mention that already?)
13 weeks of paid maternity and paternity leave,Ref ID: 04160-9502602115Classification: Data Analyst

Compensation: $52.18 to $60.00 hourly

Robert Half Technology is looking for a Data Analyst to help our client in South Austin on an upcoming short term project.

Duties:
Collect and document business requirements for reporting and analysis initiatives with customers.
Perform quantitative and/or qualitative data analysis and prepare results to share with internal and external customers.
Aid in design and development of data warehouse/data mart applications.
Undertake complex data integration activities.
Utilize SQL or other advanced analytic tools to perform data extract and query functions.
Identify and troubleshoot data anomalies and irregularities.
Prepare written and oral reports that communicate necessary information to internal and external customers.
Willingness to learn and work with Business Intelligence (BI) tools for extracting and compiling data.
Become a data subject matter expert (SME) and understand various sources and applications of CCC data.
Performs other duties as assigned.
Job Requirements:
Use of statistics to solve problems and perform moderately complex data analysis. - Experience understanding and writing SQL queries in various environments. - Experience developing and troubleshooting programming code (e.g. SQL, SAS, STATA, R). - Demonstrated ability to manage and prioritize multiple projects with varying deadlines. - Compliance with data confidentiality and security procedures. - Perform complex operations in Microsoft Office Suite, with an emphasis on Excel and Access. - Ability to write and speak clearly, easily communicating complex ideas as indicated by audience. - Knowledge of healthcare, including medical claims coding, relationships between health plans, providers, and payers, a plus. MINIMUM EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE - Bachelors degree in related field required, Masters degree preferred. - 1-3 years of experience with data management and statistical analysis. - Proficiency in using SQL for database queries. - Experience in a health or healthcare field. - Experience using statistical analysis software such as SAS, R, or STATA is desirable but not required. - Any equivalent combination of education and/or experience may substitute Apply today if interested.
Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/technology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,Hi All,

I hope all is well. My name is Neeraj Harsh. I am a Technical Recruiter with Avacend Inc. I thought you might be interested in the following opportunity. If you're available for an opportunity or keeping your options open, please reply to my email with your resume. Looking forward to speaking with you soon.

The following is the job description that we received from our client

Position : RM - Data Management Practitioner (8966938)

Start Date: 3/25/19

Duration: 0-12 month(s)

End Date: 3/24/20

LOCATION: AUSTIN TX 78749 Low

Description: OVERALL PURPOSE OF JOB

Understand client requirements and build ETL solution using Alteryx jobs to perform all business rules. Build solution is such way that which can absorb clients change request very easily. Find innovative ways to accomplish tasks and handle multiple projects simultaneously and independently. Works with Data & appropriate teams to effectively source required data. Effectively communicate the findings to business stakeholders and clients.

Responsibilities/Authorities/Main accountabilities:
Experience in Data Extraction, Transforming and Loading (ETL) between Homogenous and Heterogeneous system using SQL tools (Talend /Alteryx).
Complex Data blending with Alteryx tool Extracting data from the source system (database, files , SFDC etc ) Developing and proper testing of Alteryx workflow Extending Alteryx workflow by writing macros Automation of Alteryx workflow using scheduler Embedding reports through Alteryx Output Deploying and Sharing Apps through Gallery Exposure on development/staging/production environments.
Skills Required:
Bachelors' degree in Engineering or Science or equivalent graduates with at least 7-8 years of overall experience.
Minimum 4 years of experience developing ETL Solutions using tools like Talend, Alteryx, SQL etc.
Strong data extraction & SQL query skills, Strong understanding of database design technique and dimension modelling.
Strong understanding of Data integration.
Strong Analytical and problem solving skills Ability to design database to store huge data with proper index and key combination to provide speedy delivery of data to clients/end users Ability and willingness to acquire knowledge about the new technologies, good analytical and interpersonal skills with ability to interact with individuals at all levels.


Hours: 8:00am to 5:00pm

Skill Required – Talend (most preferred) , SQL
Additional Job Details:

Local Candidates only Prefer GC or US Citizens but will evaluate H1B Visa

Primary Skill SQL (Structured Query Language)

Location: AUSTIN TX 78749 Low

If you are interested, please contact us with your most updated resume at 770.702.0134 or reply via this email.

We hope to hear from you soon.

Thank you again for your time and attention!

Have a wonderful day.

Thank You,

Email me with your most update resume - neeraj.h@avacend.com

Neeraj Harsh

Lead Recruiter

Avacend Inc

3155 North Point Pkwy Bldg. G

Suite 130, Alpharetta GA 30005

Phone: 770-702-0137

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Austin, US-TX,Title: Data Analyst with Alteryx experience

Location: AUSTIN TX 78749

Duration: 12+ months with extension possible

Job Description:
Skills: Talend, SSIS, ETL solution using Alteryx jobs to perform all business rules
Bachelors' degree in Engineering or Science or equivalent graduates with at least 7-8 years of overall experience
5 years of experience developing BI Solutions using tools like SSIS, Alteryx, etc.
Automation of Alteryx workflow using scheduler
Thank You,

Shibu Singha

Manager - Service Delivery

Avacend, Inc.

3155 North Point Pkwy Bldg. G

Suite 130, Alpharetta GA 30005

Phone: 770-702-0134

Shibu.S@avacend.com

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Austin, US-TX,Location: Round Rock, TXDescription: Our client is currently seeking a Data Lineage Analyst in the Round Rock, TX area.

For immediate consideration email a copy of your current resume to Amanda at ajaurigue@judge.com

This job will have the following responsibilities:

• Document user stories, requirements, and testing plans to support implementation of EDC application operating models to align with Data Governance Office requirements.
• Document design and perform testing to support metadata import and export jobs and creation of data governance reporting/KPIs.
• Oversee setup and design for classification of data for enterprise applications.
• Adhere to SDLC policies and standards for technical management of the EDC platforms for business.
• Support enterprise entities during data governance on-boarding and utilization of EDC.
Required:
• 2+ years of experience as a business system analyst working with data governance including 1+ year of recent experience in development of a data quality and/or data classification rules. 3-5 years of data-centric IT work.
• Experience working in an Agile Scrum team environment.
• Ability to understand, translate, and communicate abstract concepts/ideas in a clear, concise, and easy to understand communication style.
• Must demonstrate analytical, problem solving, and research skills that allow working with problems that are complex and often unique.
Preferred Skills:

• Bachelors degree in Business, Finance, Information Technology or a related field.
• Experience with Informatica Enterprise Data Catalog (or other technical metadata tools) strongly preferred.
• Experience with data governance tools including technical and business metadata, data lineage, etc.
• Experience working in a regulatory, risk, and compliance environment and supporting associated projects.
• Experience in the financial services industry a plus • Experience with JIRA and Confluence.

Contact: ajaurigue@judge.com
This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com

Job Requirements:,Title Data Analyst Location Tampa, FL Job Type Minimum 6 Month Contract About CSI Tech CSI Tech is a different kind of IT talent company. We do our homework to match the right people, with the right skills, to every client challenge. Whether you're an organization with an immediate IT staffing need or an IT professional searching for the ideal opportunity, CSI Tech is the solution you've been looking for. We do IT talent right. We are seeking a Sr. Data Analyst who meets the below qualifications Required Experience Must have experience with SAS and SQL Must be able to pull data, run queries, modify queries andor basic SQL skills Must be highly analytical Must have experience analyzing complex data sets Must be able to work in a fast-paced environment Work Experience Healthcare experience is required (preferably on the payor side) Expenses reimbursement, according to your contract Consultant Care Program POSITION SUMMARY Primary point of contact for interface between data users and IS teams. Reviews programming requests and work with business users and technical staff to identify, gather, analyze, and document data requirements. Conduct analysis of business and user data needs, documenting requirements, create source to target mappings and revising existing logic, as necessary. Perform analysis of data needs for users and cross reference to data sources in IT systems. Responsible for the analysis, design, development, testing, and documentation of information management systems. Drives defining and maintaining development standards and development best practices. TechnicalFunctional Competencies Database used is Oracle and SQL,Description Responsibilities include Analyze and query multiple, databases and systems to produce reports and databases. Design andor develop specific databases for collection, tracking, and reporting of departmental data. Responsible for collecting, analyzing, interpreting, and summarizing data in preparation for generation of statistical and analytical reports. Recognize, investigate, and resolve data discrepancies and anomalies. Actively seek and recommend improvement to the data update process and documentation. Perform checks and audit of various data sources to ensure data is accurate and complete. Using software tools for data analysis, including SQL and Excel, andor other software, analyze raw data, draw conclusions and provide recommendations. Collect, compile and analyze data to measure and report on program performance. Provide reports of analyses to decision makers. Preferred Qualifications Must demonstrate experience with database design, reporting tools, and project management and familiarity with health care information system industry. In-depth knowledge of large datasets, SQL In-depth knowledge of ETLinteroperability processes and workflows Excellent technical writing and communication skills Ability to plan, organize and coordinate work assignments Ability to work effectively and independently Requirements SQL Queries, Relational Database, MS Excel, Database Table Robert Half Technology matches IT professionals with some of the best companies on a temporary, project or full-time basis. From roles in software and applications to IT infrastructure and operations, we provide you unparalleled access to exciting career opportunities. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the technology jobs that match your skills and priorities - fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets. From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNE's "Most Admired Companies" list every year since 1998. Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go! Contact your local Robert Half Technology office at 888.490.4429 or visit www.roberthalf.comjobstechnology to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities. All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada. 2020 Robert Half Technology. An Equal Opportunity Employer MFDisabilityVeterans. By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use httpswww.roberthalf.comterms-of-use .,Software Guidance Assistance, Inc., (SGA), is searching for a BusinessData Analyst for a Contract assignment with one of our premier Healthcare clients in Jacksonville, FL. Responsibilities Analyze business needs to determine technical requirements and identifies impacted areassystemsprocesses and evaluates alternative solutions Design, develop, documents, test or support modification of computer programs andor systems Research and assist in designs solutions for general maintenance requests to resolve system problems Prepare detailed system requirements and assists in functional design solutions for new productsfunctionality and enhancements to existing productsfunctionality Provide oversight and final review of design specification Take the initiative to seek out areas of improvement Assigned to highly complex projects, systems or initiatives Provide input into forecasting and project-planning for scoperequirements documents andor vendor contracts to minimize risk to on-time, cost-effective solution fulfillment. Lead a systematic process for capturing requirements. Work with partners to capture requirements in a standard format that can serve as the foundation for developing technical documentation. Using SDLC processes and associated tools, analyzes current system targeted for replacementenhancement to determine business and technical functions to be included in design. Prepare crosswalks for transforming input data to output with application of rules Work with Developers and other IT staff to determine system components and functional flow of components and data between components. Validate the design documentation with the appropriate parties and receives approval on these documents. Review final design documents to ensure that they clearly explain the work expectations. Clarify design expectations. Answer business and technical questions. Research and involve appropriate parties to resolve more complex business and technical issues. Continuously assess systems as business direction changes for impacts to existing designs. Understand impacts and works as appropriate to determine best solution. Provide consultative support for the systems within their product family Partner with developers and other IT staff to ensure the design fulfills business and technical requirements Responsible for relationship management responsibilities for assigned vendors Prepare technical documentation and deliverables including flow charts, models, and procedures, user guides, scorecards, and reporting. Ensure adherence to practices, standards, policies, and procedures. Develop test scenarios test cases, performs test executions for various system components. Prepare complex test strategies to ensure comprehensive coverage of system components and interfaces provides SME level expertise and recommends test strategies and scenarios for junior level analysts. Develop and document vetted contingency plans in case of risks or roadblocks Responsible for consensus and relationship building between Business, IT teams and BRMs Other duties as assigned Strong knowledge of MS Excel and MS Visio Required Skills Bachelor's Degree in a Computer, Mathematics, or Business-related field or relevant work experience 3-5 years' experience in an analytical role, preferably in a BSA or similar role. 3-5 years' experience working on reporting projects and building dashboards 3-5 years strong data mapping, crosswalk skills 3-5 years gathering and documenting business operational reporting requirements Ability to write simple to complex SQL Queries Experience in Application development, testing, andor businesssystems analysis role Various Domain experience Health Care, Financial, etc. Experience using Agile, Waterfall, or hybrid methodology Specific tools, languages and specialty skills may vary SGA is a Certified Women's Business Enterprise (WBE) celebrating over thirty years of service to our national client base for both permanent placement and consulting opportunities. For consulting positions, we offer a variety of benefit options including but not limited to health dental insurance, paid vacation, timely payment via direct deposit. SGA accepts transfers of H1 sponsorship for most contracting roles. We are unable to sponsor for Right-to-Hire, Fulltime, or Government roles. All parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply for all roles. Only those authorized to work for government entities will be considered for government roles. Please inquire about our referral program if you would like to submit a candidate for any of our open or future job opportunities. SGA is an EEO employer. We encourage Veterans to apply. To view all of our available job postings andor to learn more about SGA please visit us online at www.sgainc.com.,Experience:5 Years of SQL Server experience
Experience with Power BI, or similar reporting packages
Verbal and written communication skills
Experience managing data in various formats
Adept at queries, report writing, and presenting findings
Ability to collaborate effectively and work as part of a team
Experiecne with data modeling and warehousing,Job Description
ARC Group has an immediate need for an experienced Sr. Data Analyst to join our client's Guidewire Support group. This position will initially be remote but will be eventually working from our client's Jacksonville, FL office.

Our client has an excellent reputation and looking to bring on a Senior Data Analyst for a Contract to Hire Opportunity. Please do not apply if you are a C2C recruiter or someone needing sponsorship.

Overview:
You will be responsible for understanding business needs, assessing the impact of the change, and translating into technical specifications. Work with the technical project team to ensure those technical requirements are documented, understood, and implemented all while supporting and communicating with the business through the implementation process.
You will be responsible for identifying business needs, assessing the impact of the change, working with the business to align the need to the base application functionality, documenting the requirements, and walking the business through the documentation to obtain approval.
Responsible for project development testing and data governance/management. This includes the development of integrated test plans and test cases, execution of the tests, analysis, and documentation of the results.
The analyst is involved throughout the entire development lifecycle (e.g., initial concept, requirement gathering, development support, testing, and final implementation and post-production support).
Position Qualifications:
Expert in data mapping, modeling, lineage, governance, and management
At least 7+ years of Guidewire Insurance Suite knowledge (Policy Center, Claim Center, Billing Center)
At least 3+ years as a Data Analyst maintaining the Data Specifications document for the Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center product at a large corporation
Effective, clear and concise verbal and written communication skills
Business Intelligence experience (Business Objects, Cognos or other BI tool)
Working knowledge of SQL (TSQL/PL SQL)
Working knowledge of ETL
5+ of QA testing experience
Working knowledge of DW/EDW, Data Hubs/Data Lakes
Education equivalent to a college degree in information technology or technical-related discipline, or the equivalent in related work experience
7+ years of Data Analyst experience.
7+ years of Guidewire Property & Casualty Guidewire Insurance industry
3+ Years Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center experience
Occasional travel is required
Preferred:
Cognos experience
10+ years of Data Analyst experience.
At least 9+ years of Guidewire Insurance Suite knowledge (Policy Center, Claim Center, Billing Center)
At least 5+ years as a Data Analyst maintaining the Data Specifications document for the Guidewire Data Hub / Info Center product at a large corporation
Advanced QA Testing experience is a plus.
Expert in SQL (T-SQL/PL SQL)
Expert in ETL
Expert in DW/EDW, Data Hubs/Data Lakes
Agile Project experience
Would you like to know more about our Senior Data Analyst role?

Great, we would like to hear from you. Please reach out to our dedicated recruiter for this role in Siana Johnson by applying below OR emailing her directly at sjohnson@arcgonline.com. If you would like to see our other positions, please visit our job board at www.arcgonline.com
Company Description
With over 20 years in the industry. ARC Group has been recognized by Forbes as a Top 20 Recruiting Firm Nationally within the US. We look forward to helping you get your next great position.,Job Description
CornerStone Staffing has partnered with a MAJOR HEALTHCARE NETWORK in Fort Worth and is currently recruiting for the following position:

Job Title: Medical Data Analyst

Location: West Fort Worth

Pay: $15+/hr

Schedule: 8:00am - 5:00pm

Job Description: Data analysis of Managed Care Programs, eligibility experience highly preferred; exceptional computer skills with experience in a healthcare setting.

Duration: Temp (3+ months with possibility to extend)

Requirements:
Professional demeanor and phone voice
Accurate data entry
Good customer service
Strong Microsoft Office experience
Must have high school diploma or GED
Sense of urgency – must be a fast worker


Application Process Includes:
Drug testing
Background check
Flu shot/TB test


To Apply for this Job:

Click the Apply Online button at the top of this page, then:
If you are currently registered with CornerStone Staffing, click the I have a username and password and want to log in button to add yourself as a candidate to this job.
If you are NOT currently registered with CornerStone Staffing, click the I need to register button to complete the application.
#ZIP

#CB

#MON
Company Description
CornerStone Staffing has been servicing the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex since 1991. We are committed to supporting our community through our core values of compassion, integrity, self discipline, and faith.

CornerStone specializes in servicing a wide variety of industries including Office Professional, Accounting, Finance, Call Center, Healthcare, IT, Engineering as well as many others. CornerStone prides itself in getting it right the first time, which leads to our superior employee retention and client satisfaction. We have achieved this by constantly scrutinizing our systems, our relationships, our marketing, and our work environment. Our relationships extend to hundreds of companies and thousands of temporary associates in the Dallas-Fort Worth area. We pride ourselves on maintaining long-term relationships with our clients and job seekers.

CornerStone currently has 11 offices across the Metroplex to serve your needs. If you are a job seeker looking for short-term supplemental income or a full-time position that will launch a new career, we can assist you in finding the right opportunity!,Job Description
We are a fast paced construction company seeking to add an Budget Analyst Assistant to our team! The ideal candidate will be responsible for reviewing and assisting with accurate data entry, file maintenance, and record keeping. If you are a detail oriented, self-starting person eager to learn and work for an industry leader this could be the place for you.

Responsibilities:
Prepare proposed budgets on new projects
Enter and reviewing a variety of data.
Assist in prepare and sort documents for data entry
Assist with inventory control
Create and maintain logs for tracking purposes
Maintain progression of job cost
Review discrepancies in data received
Advise supervisor of issues related to data
Answer and direct phone calls occasionally
Qualifications:
Proficient in Microsoft Excel - (Required)
Previous experience in job costing, data entry or other related fields
Strong problem solving and critical thinking skills
Strong organizational skills
Deadline and detail-oriented
Construction background (Not required but preferred),Fidelity TalentSource is your destination for discovering your next temporary role at Fidelity Investments. We are currently sourcing for a Data Conversion Analyst to work in Fidelity’s Workplace Investments Group in Westlake, TX!

Role Summary:


The Data Conversion Systems Analyst is tasked with supporting data conversion solutions by improving the conversion process in partnership with internal IT and external business partners. The Systems Analyst is the primary advocate and liaison for the on-shore and off-shore developers for who they support during the conversion process. The Analyst will primarily be supporting data conversions under mentorship of Senior Associates; however will be 100% accountable for their work.

This resource will be supporting the conversion of retirement, 401(k) and define contribution funds and participants from clients to our platform, which means there will be a high level of scrutiny and pressure. The candidate will be working with resources which include business-facing teams, other systems analysts, as well as on-shore and off-shore developers – and therefore must be a phenomenal teammate able to work with a variety of organizations.

The Data Conversion Systems Analyst is responsible for the receipt of inbound data records, the creation of the technical conversion specifications to “map” these external records to the internal Fidelity specs, participate in the creation of the conversion strategy document by providing technical details to augment the business requirements, offer mentorship and support when it comes to the accurate creation and loading of the data to our systems and provide systems support to the project team. Works on multiple projects concurrently and contributes to timely and on-budget project goals.

Responsibilities:


Architecture
Aligns with data conversion and implementation standards.
Understands data conversion standard methodologies.
Develops original and creative solutions to on-going data conversion efforts.
Analyze client/vendor source data.
Design
Performs independent and complex functional data analysis for multiple projects supporting several data conversions at one time.
Designs/improves conversion technical specifications (known as the Data Element Listing) to support the data conversion effort. Documents detailed instructions for data conversion.
Performs functional analysis for projects to support the creation of other project documentation (such as the Conversion Strategy Document).
Participates in data conversion design and accuracy review.
Development / Execution
Plans and coordinates project schedules and coordinates with senior associates, external vendors and internal contacts for project assignments.
Receives data from external record keepers and posts those records to the mainframe environment for programmer use.
Reviews external records for file layout consistency, adjusting requirements where needed.
Interacts with external record keepers to understand and decipher file layouts in order to convert them to Fidelity layouts.
Establishes partnerships across multiple businesses and functions.
Testing
Performs conversion testing by reviewing conversion reports.
Supports conversion testing corrections for any conversion problems.
Assists in the planning and conducting of client/user review of conversion results (reports and implementation of corrections)
Supports and performs all phases of testing leading to the data conversion of implementation
Deployment
Responsible for supporting implementation of moderate-scope to major data conversions.
Responsible for post-installation testing and correction of any conversion problems.
Documentation
Develops comprehensive documentation for all data conversions
Responsible for post-installation testing correction of any conversion problems.
Assists data conversion team working with associates across various functions.
Raises data conversion project issues to senior associates and managers.
Qualifications:


Bachelor's Degree preferred.
2+ year’s experience - demonstrable understanding of the data conversion implementation processes including analysis, design, problem resolution and planning.
Experience in Financial Services, Banking, 401(k), Define Contribution, Mixed Election, Retirement funds is highly preferred.
Solid grasp of Investment industry is needed.
Must be a “specialist” in Microsoft Excel, with a solid grasp of Microsoft Word and Microsoft Access.
Experience in data transmission protocols (such as SFPT, TSO, etc) is highly preferred.
Company Overview


Fidelity TalentSource, formerly Veritude, is the in-house temporary staffing provider for Fidelity Investments, one of the largest and most diversified global financial services firms in the industry. We recruit individuals from a variety of backgrounds, including technology and customer service, to fill assignments across Fidelity’s U.S.-based regional and investor center locations. If you would like to experience Fidelity’s diverse and inclusive workplace while expanding your skillset and developing your professional network, consider a role with Fidelity TalentSource.

For information about working at Fidelity TalentSource, visit FTSJobs.com.

Company Overview


Fidelity TalentSource, formerly Veritude, is the in-house temporary staffing provider for Fidelity Investments, one of the largest and most diversified global financial services firms in the industry. We recruit individuals from a variety of backgrounds, including technology and customer service, to fill assignments across Fidelity’s U.S.-based regional and investor center locations. If you would like to experience Fidelity’s diverse and inclusive workplace while expanding your skill set and developing your professional network, consider a role with Fidelity TalentSource. For information about working at Fidelity TalentSource, visit FTSJobs.com.

Information about Fidelity Investments


At Fidelity, we are focused on making our financial expertise broadly accessible and effective in helping people live the lives they want. We are a privately held company that places a high degree of value in creating and nurturing a work environment that attracts the best talent and reflects our commitment to our associates. We are proud of our diverse and inclusive workplace where we respect and value our associates for their unique perspectives and experiences. For information about working at Fidelity, visit FidelityCareers.com.

Fidelity Investments and Fidelity TalentSource are equal opportunity employers.,Data Analyst
If you are a Data Analyst with experience, please read on!

Job Title: Data Analyst
Job Locations: Remote with HQ in Redwood City, CA
Job Type: $45-$50/hr
Requirements:
1.) 3+ years experience creating dashboards in Business Intelligence (BI) tools (i.e. Tableau)
2.) Experience writing code in Python, R or similar language
3.) Bachelor's Degree
4.) Experience writing SQL Queries, and Excel Formulas
What You Will Be Doing
As a member of our team, you will be writing code that is readable in flat files, and processing data in several different ways and you will responsible for summarizing data results into files, charts, and graphs.
What You Need for this Position
Requirements:
1.) 3+ years experience creating dashboards in Business Intelligence (BI) tools (i.e. Tableau)
2.) Experience writing code in Python, R or similar language
3.) Bachelor's Degree
4.) Experience writing SQL Queries, and Excel Formulas

Preferred Skills:
1.) Salesforce experience
2.) Healthcare/Health Plan Analytics experience
What's In It for You
- Competitive Compensation $40 - $50/hr
- Benefits (Medical, Dental)
- PTO
So, if you are a Data Analyst with experience, please apply today!
-
Applicants must be authorized to work in the U.S.


CyberCoders, Inc is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer

All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, protected veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by law.

Your Right to Work In compliance with federal law, all persons hired will be required to verify identity and eligibility to work in the United States and to complete the required employment eligibility verification document form upon hire.,This is a data analysis position tasked with solving complex problems through innovative and in depth analysis. The Consultant is tasked with providing insight into device and customer behavior through Business Intelligence, Data analysis, exploratory and confirmatory methodologies. This position is responsible for designing, owning, implementing and articulating opportunities to apply data analysis to ensure billing accuracy and customer experience.

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Hilliard-OH-USA,,Data Analyst

Required Skills:
Must have 1-3 years of experience in a professional data analysis
Knowledge of Microsoft Office and components, including Access
Experience creating schedules in Excel is required
Experience with relational databases, SQL, Crystal Reports.
Some familiarity with IT groups will be required
Analyze data using appropriate control and run charts
Must be strong with Math numerator and denominator
Must be comfortable in a fast-paced environment
Must be polished and able to present to Executives if needed
Must be driven and eager to learn
Must have a great attitude
Excellent written and verbal communication skills are ABSOLUTELY required
Must be accountable, this group is the top of their department and they must be able to trust you


Desired Skills:
Degree in HIM
Healthcare Data Analysis
Description of Role/Responsibilities:
We are looking for a Data Analyst to join an expanding team at one of the most well respected Health Care organizations in Columbus. Our client is seeking a Data Analyst in their Quality Improvement Services department. This position is responsible for reviewing and analyzing data that supports assigned projects in Quality Improvement Services; will maintain databases and sources of information for quality initiatives, accreditation efforts, regulatory mandates, contractual requirement and ad hoc requests; position coordinates data from various sources.
Find Us on Facebook!
Follow Us on Twitter!

Beacon Hill is an Equal Opportunity Employer that values the strength diversity brings to the workplace. Individuals with Disabilities and Protected Veterans are encouraged to apply.

Company Profile:

Beacon Hill Technologies, a premier National Information Technology Staffing Group, provides world class technology talent across all industries on a contract, direct (permanent), contract-to-direct and project basis. Beacon Hill Technologies' dedicated team of recruiting and staffing experts consistently delivers quality IT professionals to solve our customers' technical and business needs.

Beacon Hill Technologies covers a broad spectrum of IT positions, including Project Management and Business Analysis, Programming/Development, Database, Infrastructure, Quality Assurance, Production/Support and ERP roles.

Learn more about Beacon Hill Staffing Group and our specialty divisions, Beacon Hill Associates, Beacon Hill Financial, Beacon Hill HR, Beacon Hill Legal, Beacon Hill Pharma and Beacon Hill Technologies by visiting www.beaconhillstaffing.com.

We look forward to working with you.

Beacon Hill. Employing the Future,Title: Analyst: Data Analytics

Location: Hilliard, OH

Duration: 6 Months Contract

No Corp. to Corp. or 3rd party Only W2 Candidates

Onsite position

Description:

This is a data analysis position tasked with solving complex problems through innovative and in depth analysis. The Consultant is tasked with providing insight into device and customer behaviour through Business Intelligence, Data analysis, exploratory and confirmatory methodologies. This position is responsible for designing, owning, implementing and articulating opportunities to apply data analysis to ensure billing accuracy and customer experience.

Job Duty/Responsibility:

- Data Mining responsibilities include creating algorithms to use patterns in the data to build and clarify models to derive consumer and business financial impacts.

- Data analysis duties involve turning large volumes of data into actionable insight for the business by:

o Choosing relevant and meaningful business questions.

o Collecting the best data that is relevant for the decision from multiple large volume data repositories.

o Reviewing and understanding the data in context to the business and how it changes.

o Cleaning and transforming the data to prepare for data analysis models.

o Analyzing the data and creating data visualizations to answer the business question.

o Customizing the analysis to focus on very specific situations.

o Communicating results in an audience appropriate manner using applicable metrics, visuals, actionable insights, recommendations and decisions.

- Participate in the development of consumer behavioral models using advanced statistical tools and methodologies.

- Create framework, using data inferences and automation, to develop reproducible data driven recommendations optimizing stated business objectives.

- Assist in the creation and continued support of internal analytics databases to ensure actionable outcomes for analyses and reporting.

- Data analysis responsibilities encompass quantitative and qualitative modeling including the design, development, implementation and validation of causal static and curvilinear time-series predictive linear, logistic and negative binomial models to form data driven conclusions

Experience:

- 4+ years of Teradata or Oracle database experience is required with expert skills in writing advanced SQL, PL/SQL packages, functions and procedures and tuning database/query performance is required

- 4+ years of experience in data analysis and demonstrated experience with data driven decision making is required

- 2+ years of experience in business intelligence tools is required

- 2+ years of experience using statistical software like SAS or SPSS is preferred.

- Experience working with Big Data and the ability to program in R, Python, Java, Hive or Pig is strongly desired.

Knowledge, Skills & Abilities:

- High level of curiosity and investigative mind-set with an attention to detail.

- Demonstrated ability towards data mining and data analysis

- Demonstrated ability to be proficient at querying and managing large datasets.

- Passion for helping people solve real-world problems.

- Analytical thinking and problem solving.

- Effective communication skills.

- Ability to gain community support and collaboration.

- A focus on shareholder value.

- A passion for educating and learning.

Education/certifications:

Please indicate whether education and/or certifications are required or desired.

Required shift:

Standard 9-5

Thank You,

Rohan Ghag
Recruitment Lead
Avacend, Inc.
3155 North Point Pkwy Bldg. G
Suite 130, Alpharetta GA 30005
Phone: 678-935-7308 / 678-935-7903

Rohan.g@avacend.com

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Hilliard, US-OH,Sr Data Analyst


Job Description

CFS Technology, Central Ohio’s premier IT staffing solutions provider, has been contacted by a longtime client that is currently seeking a Sr Data Analyst with 5-11 years experience working with COGNOS, Data Mining, Dashboards, ad hoc reports. Sr Data Analysts —are you interested in taking the next step in your career with a progressive healthcare organization that will truly value your expertise? Join our team at CFS Technology!

Here at CFS Technology, we understand the requirements of our clients and we have the resources to provide them with exceptional talent. Our client’s satisfaction is the most important part of our business, and we work hard to ensure that each placement we do is the absolute best.

Due to continued growth, we are currently seeking seasoned individuals like you to serve as a Sr Data Analyst. We will assign a dedicated recruiter who will get to know you, learn about your skills, your goals and your preferences, and then match you with just the right assignments with just the right companies, which provides you with limitless potential for success. You have the talent, drive and expertise—we have the right connections. Together, we can help you to build a better career. Contact us today!

Sr Data Analyst

Job Responsibilities

As a Sr Data Analyst, you will work collaboratively with an analytics team utilizing COGNOS to produce ad hoc reports, do predictive analysis, and develop dashboards. This is a chance to get on the ground floor of a Data Mining project that will transform healthcare.

Specific duties in this role include

Data Mining patient population records
Ad hoc reports related to coding of office visits for physicians
Creating dashboards for physicians on individual patients
Data extracting

Sr Data Analyst


Requirements

We are looking for an experienced Sr Data Analyst who combines strong analytical and organizational skills with solid prioritization and attention to detail abilities. You must have sound judgment and strong reasoning skills, as well as good analytic and problem-solving abilities. Excellent verbal, written and interpersonal skills utilized within a diverse cultural environment are critical as well.

Specific requirements for this position include:
5-11 years data analytics experience
COGNOS experience a must
Dashboard experience
Strong database skills
Finance reporting a plus
Articulate, strong verbal communication skills
Collaborative personality/good team player!
Tableau or Power Bl experience a plus.
Ability to work independently, as well as part of a team, in a diverse cultural environment.
Sr Data Analyst


Build a rewarding long-term career with us at CFS—when we knock, doors open.
Id: EB-1920432548,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client that is looking for Entry Level Data Analyst in Charlotte, NC.

Summary:
You will work with client marketing team on Renewal project 3.0, help impute contract expiration date, prepare lists for sellers, re-run lists regularly to capture any renewals, prep lists for client communications, prep lists for Billing team for rate action, etc.

Essential Duties:
Clean, sort and update client list to most up to date account owner
Upload client list on RSL and manage renewal lead progress
Create weekly report on RSL progress
Communicate with seller on their renewal progress and follow up
Confirm client removal from the rate action list once they renewed their contract
Confirm client contract data in SF
Submit client list to Billing for rate action and provide final report
REQUIREMENTS:
Strongly prefer working knowledge of Salesforce.com
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Looking for someone with strong experience analyzing data and pulling data sets\. Putting together data mapping for integration with various systems and their internal applications\.**\*\* Per client's request, no corp\-to\-corp and no sponsorship available \*\***TEKsystems is actively searching for a Data Analyst with extensive experience for one of our Fortune 500 clients\. This position sits on\-site in Charlotte, NC five days/week\. The top skills are as follows:1\. Individual with strong understanding of multiple databases and experience working with large data sets to map the data and trace back to original systems of record, primarily utilizing SQL and Mongodb\.2\. Ability to review requirements to understand privacy data required to identify with in the systems of record3\. Demonstrated a strong ability to communicate and build relationships with team members such as application owners,developers and stakeholders\.Must be willing to work on a W2 basis and no sponsorship is offered\. Unfortunately, third party vendors will not be accepted for this role\. An in\-person interview is required for the role so local Charlotte, NC candidates are highly preferred\.Please apply directly to the posting for more information\. Candidates that match the requirements above will then be contacted for submittal\.**About TEKsystems:****We're partners in transformation\. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity\. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia\. As an industry leader in Full\-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real\-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change\. That's the power of true partnership\. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company\.**TEKsystems is a equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regard to race, genetic information, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability or any other characteristic protected by law\.,Job Description
Data validation and aggregation
Profile data to ensure it is of quality for reports
Review queries to ensure they are optimized
Engage with team to optimize database design, data aggregation and reporting
Performing quality assurance on both static reports and online reporting dashboard
Producing auditable evidence of quality checks
Align processes with reporting governance guidelines
Source data to be used in the for the Business Intelligence dashboards
Source data for canned reports, data extracts and ad how requests
Required Qualifications / Desired Qualifications
5+ years of experience with Teradata SQL
4+ years of reporting and analysis
SAS experience is desired but not required
Excellent verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills
Ability to design intuitive meaningful static and online reporting
Extensive experience driving risk reporting and related metrics.
Ability to meet stringent deadlines
Ability to prioritize work, meet deadlines, achieve goals, and work under pressure in a dynamic and complex environment
Preferred location: Charlotte,Financial Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Charlotte, NC+ salary:$25 - $34.43 per hour+ date posted:Monday, July 6, 2020+ experience:4 Years+ job type:Contract+ industry:Public Administration+ reference:488870+ questions:704.972.3770.**job description**Financial Data Analystjob summary:Randstad Professionals is seeking a Data Analyst with a focus on Finance and Accounting to start in a role in uptown Charlotte.location: Charlotte, North Carolinajob type: Contractsalary: $25.00 - 34.43 per hourwork hours: 8 to 5education: Bachelor's degreeexperience: 4 Yearsresponsibilities:**Job Description:**This Data Analyst position will be responsible for preparing financial data for analytical or operational uses, building data pipelines to pull together information from different source systems, integrating, consolidating and cleansing data, developing data governance documentation, then creating visualizations and content for end user consumption.- Requirements Gathering - Work directly with subject matter experts to identify, understand, and translate key metrics into high quality analytics solutions designed to enhance and improve critical business processes.- Visualization Design - Ability to turn those requirements into impactful dashboards aimed at displaying large amounts of data in a way to drive better, more informed decisions for the organization This will require a strong understanding of, and experience building, effective charts, visualizations and financial data.- Dashboard Development (Power BI) - Utilize your skills and knowledge to coalesce your visualizations into best in class analytics dashboards primarily using Microsoft Power BI.- Innovation - Champion the introduction of new practices for integration, maintenance, testing, deployment, reporting & analytics.- Governance - Work with subject matter experts to build solutions using approved calculations and data elements, emphasizing proper data governance.**Primary Duties and Responsibilities**- Ability to quickly gather requirements, learn subject matter and extract and transform data+ Adept in optimizing data models and visualizations maximizing Power BIs speed of response+ Working knowledge on how to automate, deliver and schedule PowerBI reports+ Ability to test data model, calculations and quality of analytical output+ Expertise in use and application of DAX and constructing advanced calculations+ Strong ability to connect to variety of data sources, proficiently using the queried data in PowerBI+ Proficient in the development of highly visual reports, dashboards and data narratives+ Strong knowledge of secondary tools like SQL, Azure+ Demonstrable experience in visualization best practices, data optimization and model efficiency+ Ability to effectively deliver and present work to the appropriate audience+ Apply data quality assurance practices in the development of data models and resulting output+ Deadline oriented with ability to manage concurrent deliverables+ Candidates should be expected to demonstrate their knowledge of PowerBI and command of data with team members (Sanitized Portfolio would be desirable)+ Familiarity with key aspects of the government financial management domain+ Ability to perform GAP analysis, define requirements and recommend changes from a finance/accounting perspective on system/process improvements.**Education / Qualifications**- Bachelor's degree or equivalent experience+ 4+ years using PowerBI as a primary analysis and visualization tool+ 4+ years developing queries and consuming data from Azure, SQL or similar tools, actively working with the data in PowerBI+ Extensive experience in data transformation through PowerBI Query Editor+ Experience in financial services, or other highly regulated governmental agency highly desirable+ Experience in CGI Advantage financial system preferredqualifications:Qualified and interested candidates please apply or send your resume to tommy.parker@randstadusa.com.skills: ExcelEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Charlotte, NC+ salary:$45.04 - $54.02 per hour+ date posted:Wednesday, June 17, 2020+ experience:6 Years+ job type:Contract+ industry:Finance and Insurance+ reference:487933+ questions:704.972.3770.**job description**Data Analystjob summary:Randstad Professionals have an excellent opportunity with a Major Financial Institution in the Uptown area of Charlotte, NC.**Required:**+ Coding experience - Must be able to code SQL from scratch+ Strong SQL skills+ Risk Management+ Audit / Assurance background+ Excel experience - Must complete an excel test before interview.location: Charlotte, North Carolinajob type: Contractsalary: $45.04 - 54.02 per hourwork hours: 8 to 5education: Bachelor's degreeexperience: 6 Yearsresponsibilities:**Job Requirements:**+ Will be part of a validation team+ BS/BA degree in STEM/IT related field or equivalent experience+ Solid understanding of methods in statistical analysis+ Strong analytical skills, with experience breaking down a large problem into smaller, solvable components+ Advanced understanding of statistics+ Solid skills in data extraction and transformation with Database+ Strong skills in data exploration, analysis, and visualization+ Strong development skills in programming languages such as python and SQL+ Experience with BI and data visualization tools+ Self-motivated and life time learner looking to research, explore, and develop new skills and knowledge+ Ability to collaborate with high-performing teams and individuals throughout the firm to accomplish common goals+ Ability to combine a deep understanding of business strategies with the quantitative methods and drive business decisions+ Excellent written and verbal communication skills; with the ability to communicate the results of your work in meaningful waysqualifications:Click To Applyskills: SQL, Excel, Data Entry, Business Analysis, AnalysisEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,Charlotte, NC
Long Term Contract
W2 Ony

The role entails supporting the reporting team in the fullfiment of the system data requests received through the intake process. Potential candidate will write SQL queries in order to complete the reporting requests, and must be able to clearly communicate requirements and capabilities.

Responsibilities:
Review and monitor incoming requests which are assigned in the technician’s queue
Ensure that the critical priority requests are prioritized accordingly before any high or standard request is picked for development
Provide Estimated Development Date and Request Status during development workflow and ensures that our reporting SLAs are being met
Ensure correct data is pulled as per the requirement provided and that it is done in a timely fashion
Report any data discrepancy to the analyst assigned on the request so that the analyst can review the potential issue and if needed raise the ticket with the concerned platform team
In case of a release it is technician’s responsibility to understand the changes (for e.g. data, table structure) and reach out to business analysts in case of any clarification is needed

Requirements:
Must be technically profound in PL/SQL and MS Office
Prior knowledge of AML/KYC reporting strongly preferred
Should be a quick learner in a fast paced environment
Strong communication is critical and must be clear and detailed
Must be flexible and available on some occasions to work late if needed
Prior knowledge of PEGA system is desired,Data Science Analyst Signature Consultants has an opportunity for a Data Science Analyst. The technical data resources (analysts or developers), need to understand how data moves, what are the data impacts and how to work with data sourcing partners. The goal is to identify any data anomalies in real time and will be responsible for mapping this data. The candidate needs a data modeling, python or coding background. Ideally would like candidates with tableau and machine learning, need a deep understanding of data life cycle. Our client is seeking an experienced technical team member to support the development and execution of a data driven mapping. The role will be dynamic in nature and require the individual to be able to handle diverse work efforts often working in both business and technical arenas including data movement and data quality controls. Role is expected to evolve as the organization matures with this leader expected to play an active role to drive that evolution. The role requires a person with curiosity and a passion for inquiry, comfort with ambiguity, and a learning mindset. Self-motivated and flexible, the candidate needs to be adept at both creative and analytical thinking. The position also requires the individual to build and maintain relationships across the enterprise. Required Job Skills Technical expertise in one or more of the following data visualization, data modeling, statistical analysis, ETL, DB development, SQL, Hadoop, Python, SQL, java, javascript, etc. AndOr Infrastructure expertise including network monitoring analysis, tracing, discovery, mapping, etc including experience with tools like Net Scout, Tanium, etc. Strong communications (verbal and written) skills and comfortable presenting to a wide variety of audiences Comfort working in dynamic, iterative and evolving situations Comfortable leading and influencing with and without direct authority Resourceful proactive in situations when not all information is available or there is no apparent "right" answer Strong collaborator who is capable of navigating conflict to enable productive solutions Excellent attention to detail Desired Job Skills Experience in data cleansing and preparation concepts and tools Programming Languages Hands-on with at least 3 of the following of Python, R, Perl, Java and Java Script Strong background in relational databases, data modeling and SQL Experience working with statistical libraries (e.g scikit-learn, scipy) and frameworks for predictive analytics Knowledge of Hadoop and UNIX will be a plus Expertise in probability and statistics, time-series analysis, or econometrics as well as experience in the use of machine learning methods, for example, linear regression, correlation, statistical significance, and so forth. Experience in data visualization concepts and tools Knowledge of Tableau andor other reporting tools Knowledge of Data Quality Controls Strong Project PlanningManagement Qualifications Minimum 5-7 years' experiences Top 3 required ITTechnical skill-sets(If applicable, include nichespecialist skillset Archer, Hadoop, Python, Microstrategy, Tableau, etc.) Python SQL Tableau About Signature Consultants, LLC Headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Signature Consultants was established in 1997 with a singular focus to provide clients and consultants with superior staffing solutions. For the ninth consecutive year, Signature was voted as one of the "Best Staffing Firms to Work For" and is now the 14th largest IT staffing firm in the United States (source Staffing Industry Analysts). With 28 locations throughout North America, Signature annually deploys thousands of consultants to support, run, and manage their clients' technology needs. Signature offers IT staffing, consulting, managed solutions, and direct placement services. For more information on the company, please visit www.sigconsult.com httpwww.sigconsult.com . Signature Consultants is the parent company to Hunter Hollis httpswww.hunterhollis.com and Madison Gunn httpswww.madisongunn.com .,Ref ID: 03201-9502589067Classification: Business Data Analyst

Compensation: DOE

Description:
The Robert Half Management Resources (RHMR) Charlotte team is looking for a Business Data Analyst.
For a full listing of Robert Half Management Resources job opportunities please join us at roberthalfmr.com.

Role:

Responsible for performing highly complex activities related to business analysis and/or modeling. Duties typically include providing insights, developing analytical strategies, performing analytical support and/or modeling regarding a wide array of business initiatives. This job requires application of analytical, statistical modeling, and forecasting methods. May focus on the theory and mathematics behind the analyses. Must be advanced in SQL.

Job Requirements:
Requirements:
5+ years reporting and analytical experience or a minimum of a Masters degree in programs such as applied mathematics, statistics, engineering, physics, accounting, finance, economics or computer sciences with 5+ years related industry experience. CFA or CPA preferred.
Companies need experienced finance, accounting and business systems consultants to assist with or lead their key initiatives. This is our specialty. Robert Half Management Resources places highly skilled consultants on interim and project engagements in organizations ranging from start-ups to FORTUNE® 1000 firms. As a consultant working on our team, you will benefit from our worldwide network of over 150 offices, which delivers an array of rewarding local opportunities and the flexibility for work/life balance while achieving your career goals. Our industry-leading alliances and broad client network provide you greater access to a variety of unique interim and long-term project opportunities that can keep you continuously engaged as a consultant. We also provide competitive benefits and compensation packages, as well as online training and continuing professional education (CPE).

At Robert Half Management Resources, your experience matters - and we put it to good use. To apply for this position or for more information on other engagements, visit us online at www.roberthalfmr.com or call your branch office at 1.888.400.7474.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States.

Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Vet
Robert Half Management Resources
201 South College St
Suite 1500
Charlotte, NC 28244
Phone: 704-342-7986
Fax: 704-342-2700

Robert Half Management Resources matches senior-level financial consultants with a variety of unique interim and long-term project opportunities in areas such as internal auditing, mergers and acquisitions, tax initiatives, and much more. Our personalized approach, innovative matching technology and global network with local market expertise help you find the legal opportunities that match your skills and priorities fast. By working with us, you have access to challenging opportunities, competitive compensation and benefits, and training to enhance your skill sets.

From philanthropy to environmental stewardship to employee programs, Robert Half is proud to have an active role in the communities in which we live and work. Our company has appeared on FORTUNEs Most Admired Companies list every year since 1998.

Download our mobile app to take your job search on the go!

Contact your local office at 888.490.3195 or visit www.roberthalf.com/jobs/management-resources to apply for this job now or find out more about other job opportunities.

All applicants applying for U.S. job openings must be authorized to work in the United States. All applicants applying for Canadian job openings must be authorized to work in Canada.

© 2020 Robert Half Management Resources. An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F/Disability/Veterans.

By clicking 'Apply Now' you are agreeing to Robert Half Terms of Use.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Analyst in Charlotte, NC.

Summary:
The Data Management Analyst is an integral role in documenting lineage, dataflows, and metadata of the company's enterprise information, processes, and assets. The candidate will work with stakeholders and subject matter experts, to develop, optimize and oversee conceptual and logical data systems and data stores.

Job Responsibilities:
Analyze and document dataflows and data management steps across all end-to-end systems and data sources
Promote and implement master data management standards
Support and implement data modeling standards, data naming standards, and data integration strategy
Design data flow diagrams and entity relationship diagrams, to promote authoritative data stores
Develop data models that simplify, consolidate and standardize data structures
Work with project teams to develop and document information requirements and business rules in the form of conceptual and logical data models, data lineage maps, data flow diagrams, and formulate the data architecture to meet business information requirements and support the business rules
Guide data designs to increase sharing and re-use, minimize and manage redundant data
Enable a customer relationship rather than product approach to the business
Maintains a balanced approach between technology and strategic focused solutions and approaches
Use interpersonal, office, and people skills to maintain smooth internal operations within data governance office
Work in conjunction with the Data Governance team to maintain the relationships with business partners (e.g. business lines, vendors, auditors) by communicating updates and deliverables
Participate in the planning and implementation of new projects, products, programs, and plans to achieve short and long-term business objectives
REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree (or equivalent work experience)
3+ years of experience as an Information Architect or Data Architect
Financial industry experience preferred
Hands-on experience and technical skills in designing and implementing enterprise level solutions
Experience working with agile development teams, methodologies and toolsets
Strong written and verbal communication, presentation, and technical writing skills with ability to effectively communicate solution recommendations and influence key stakeholders Ability to lead and direct multiple projects simultaneously; Proven leadership ability
Be a self-motivated individual with strong analytical and research skills
Ability to handle multiple high priority demands and have the ability to be detail oriented, yet still be able to have clarity on the overall picture
Working knowledge of BI tools (Power BI is a plus)
Working knowledge of Agile methodologies (e.g. Scrum, Kanban, Lean, XP) is a plus
Need candidates that are flexible with working conditions
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Data Business Analyst Characteristics:

+ You have 2+ years of experience defining requirements and using data and metrics to draw business insights (financial/business analytics).
+ You communicate technical ideas with ease and effectively and are always looking for ways to collaborate to deliver high-quality products.
+ You have attention to detail and customer service mindset, allowing you to quickly adapt to new demands in a quickly evolving environment
+ You have experience with writing scripts in Python, using SQL to quarry databases, and building models/Marcos in Excel programming languages (Python, SQL) and strong excel skills.
+ You're passionate about the markets, and continue to develop your understanding of finance, modeling, and accounting.
+ You have an educational background in both Engineering and Finance/Business (minimum of a Bachelors)

About TEKsystems:

We're partners in transformation. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia. As an industry leader in Full-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change. That's the power of true partnership. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company.

TEKsystems is a equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regard to race, genetic information, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability or any other characteristic protected by law.,MUST BE ABLE TO WORK ON A W2 WITHOUT SPONSORSHIPPosition Summary:
The Data Management Analyst is responsible for oversight of data collection and integrity, and for performing
data analyses across the agency. This position will play a pivotal role in structuring and optimizing data practices
at the administrative and program levels, including for more than 30 programs and services.

Responsibilities:

Lead agency-wide protocols and procedures on data gathering, entry, integrity, analysis and outcome
reporting

Conduct data analyses to provide insights on program and administrative outcomes

Work with staff to identify key program data for collection and analysis

Build surveys, collection methods and standardization protocols for new and existing programs

Create analyses, reports, and dashboards on data for internal and external purposes, including formal reports,
and make recommendations

Work closely with supervisors, division directors, and program directors on data protocols

Oversee database system for agency; act as lead system administrator for system
Oversee and lead training of program and other staff on use of database systems

Lead meetings on data insights and trends for staff

Provide program outcomes and other data for development team and other fund-raising grants or initiatives
Maintain strict confidentiality both inside and outside the organization
Other tasks as may be required

Qualification Required:

Bachelor's degree required

3 years+ working in a research, data management or analysis role

Computer expertise in Microsoft office, especially analysis and presentation tools (Word, Excel, PowerPoint)

Ability to present data for presentation to audiences (graphs, charts, etc.)

Excellent research skills; ability to cull/identify city-wide/state or national data for comparisons or analysis

Logical thinking, skilled, and strong interest program performance, analysis, optimization and outcomes

Strong attention to detail and nuance for numerical and qualitative precision

Excellent deduction and analytical skills to interpret and transform various types of data

Excellent interpersonal skills, with tact and persuasive ability; strong oral and written communication skills

Ability to work as a member of and with teams with all levels of staff

Self-motivation and ability to problem solve

Ability to analyze and make insights from large data sets

About TEKsystems:

We're partners in transformation. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia. As an industry leader in Full-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change. That's the power of true partnership. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company.

The company is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.

If you would like to request a reasonable accommodation, such as the modification or adjustment of the job application process or interviewing process due to a disability, please call 888 472-3411 or email accommodation@teksystems .com for other accommodation options.

Job Requirements:,Job Description


Job #: 1077216

This analyst will be on the team converting Peoplesoft data to Workday. They need to have a deep history in HR data and high level understanding of the Informatica tools (Informatica Analyst & DVO).
BSC Job Description
Resource will work with business and data conversion team to collect and define data conversion mapping requirements for each Workday prototype build.
Resource will act as a point person for data issues identified as part of the Data Conversion load process. Resource will coordinate resolutions and timing with respective functional product teams.
Resource will validate the migration of data into the Workday tenant using Informatica Analyst tool, DVO tool and ensure migration is aligned with requirements.
Resource will work to enable the Infomatica Analyst tool to the broader audience of the product team and raise their awareness of new tools available to them, include data profiling, scorecards and reference table management for transformation related activities.
EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Data AnalystBusiness Analyst Signature Consultants has an opportunity for a Data AnalystBusiness Analyst. Our client is seeking a BADAs with extensive SQL, data analysis modeling, python. The candidate needs to be able to provide point of view on what the data is telling us, need to understand ETL code, metadata tables. It is helpful to have BI tools like tableau or microstrategy and big data experience like (Hive, Hadoop). Enterprise Data Management Operations (EDMO) is accountable for managing a point of view on the health of the data across the BAC enterprise. A data risk framework, enterprise defined data domains and testing results are used to inform this POV. This project will drive improvements to the way the EDMO validates control effectiveness. Specifically, this role will partner with business and technology subject matter experts to collect information about services, processes and the data flow through systems, including contingency environments. Primary responsibilities include data gathering, analysis and presenting results for management. Qualifications Minimum 4-5 years DataBusiness Analyst experience 5+ years SQL, coding, queries, data analysis, modeling Strong business acumen with flow diagrams (process designdata lineagemapping) Experience working with large data sets to develop statistical relationships and models Critical thinking Problem solving Proactive self-starter Organized and detail oriented Proficiency in Microsoft Office Suite (PowerPoint, Excel, Visio, project) Strong communication (written and verbal) Proven history of being a team player comfortable engaging with team members from multiple businesses Demonstrated ability to work in a fast-paced environment, maintain quality goals, meet aggressive delivery deadlines and garner consensus from multiple technical and non-technical partners Top 3 required ITTechnical skill-sets (If applicable, include nichespecialist skillset Archer, Hadoop, Python, Microstrategy, Tableau, etc.) Python SQL Tableau Desired Job Skills Application and data management concepts, including lineage and recovery Prior testingaudit experience About Signature Consultants, LLC Headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Signature Consultants was established in 1997 with a singular focus to provide clients and consultants with superior staffing solutions. For the ninth consecutive year, Signature was voted as one of the "Best Staffing Firms to Work For" and is now the 14th largest IT staffing firm in the United States (source Staffing Industry Analysts). With 28 locations throughout North America, Signature annually deploys thousands of consultants to support, run, and manage their clients' technology needs. Signature offers IT staffing, consulting, managed solutions, and direct placement services. For more information on the company, please visit www.sigconsult.com httpwww.sigconsult.com . Signature Consultants is the parent company to Hunter Hollis httpswww.hunterhollis.com and Madison Gunn httpswww.madisongunn.com .,Title : Data Analyst
Location :Charlotte, NC
Good knowledge in Banking and Corporate Finance domain
Worked in Migration projects and cross function teams Define project requirements (Functional and Non-Functional) interacting with different team and gather
Developing andimplementingdata analyses, data collection systems and other strategies that optimize statistical efficiency and quality
Interpret data, analyze results using statistical techniques and provide ongoing reports
Define project requirements (Functional and Non-Functional) and prepare the BRD and FRD
Determine operational objectives by studying business functions, gathering information and evaluating output requirements and formats Construct workflow charts and diagrams, studying system capabilities and writing specifications for the migration and extraction of data
Good knowledge in SQL and Extracting data from data base and analyse the data
Strong knowledge of and experience with reporting packages (Business Objects etc), databases (SQL etc), programming (XML, Javascript, or ETL frameworks)
Knowledge of statistics and experience using statistical packages for analyzing datasets (Excel, SPSS, SAS etc)
Knowledge in Waterfall/Agile Methodology Knowledge in SAP would be advantage,Sr. BI Analytics Consultant
Are you looking to make a difference in a patient's life? At ***, you will find an innovative culture that is patient focused and dedicated to making a difference. As an organization, we are united in our responsibility to create healthier futures.

What you will be doing
The Sr. BI Analytics Consultant brings meaning and insights to data - helping customers better serve patients and improve health outcomes. Do you solve business problems using data analytics? Can you use data to help others understand what is really happening? Can you represent data in an impactful way that leads to better business decision-making?

As part of our business analytics team, you will combine knowledge of our business data with your comprehensive analytics skills to deliver program insights to our clients. You will also partner with internal business leaders to showcase the value of our services through impactful visualizations and story-telling with data.

Primary Responsibilities
Partner with customers and internal teams to create a compelling analytics strategy for clients, encompassing advanced analytics, actionable insights, and reporting solutions to support defined strategy
Leverage data that tell the story of current performance and highlight opportunities for improvement. Consult with clients and internal stakeholders to help them interpret our data and assist in addressing business challenges thru data analytics.
Support client data and reporting needs by capturing requirements, coordinating work requests, and communicating progress directly with stakeholders.
Represent our client's strategic needs by influencing data analytics approach and new product development.
Prepare and deliver analytics presentations that showcase the value of our patient services.

What your background should look like
Four-year Bachelors' degree program, preferably with an emphasis in mathematics, statistics, or data and analytics. Advanced degree or certification in analytics or statistics is a plus.
2+ years' experience analyzing data using business intelligence software, such as PowerBI, Qlik, Tableau.
5+ years' experience working directing directly with customers, ideally in a data analytics role.
Demonstrated experience in preparation and delivery of presentations to corporate executives.
Organized and demonstrated experience in partnering with multiple teams and stakeholders
Demonstrated effectiveness in partnering with leaders while able to work independently to deliver solution.
Critical thinking and problem-solving ability.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.

Nesco Resource is an equal employment opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, age, or veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristics with respect to employment opportunities.,Systems/Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Charlotte, NC+ salary:$37 - $47 per hour+ date posted:Thursday, July 2, 2020+ job type:Contract+ industry:Finance and Insurance+ reference:788361**job description**Systems/Data Analystjob summary:**Summary:**+ As the ETU Tech Systems/Data Analyst, the candidate will be supporting the ETU program by partnering with EIT to review and assess the FLU Technology portfolio (AIT's, Non-AITs, LMAs, etc) that are used E2E to manage the FLU QA Test Execution/Reporting process.+ Candidate will be expected to interview multiple FLU Business and Tech partners, document current state architecture/process/data flows, capture findings and draft recommendations for migration to EIT's target state platform. Candidate is expected to have excellent technical, analytical, problem solving and communication skills.+ Candidate should also be comfortable with being exposed to different types of technologies and know how best to approach review and analysis of each tech stack type (e.g. Client side, Server side, Middle ware)location: Charlotte, North Carolinajob type: Contractsalary: $37 - 47 per hourwork hours: 8am to 5pmeducation: Bachelorsresponsibilities:**Responsibilities**+ Analyze (including requesting demos or getting system access) to business applications, including application & web servers, associated hardware, endpoints, and databases Meet and coordinate with internal and external stakeholders to establish scope, system goals, and requirements Develop, analyze, prioritize, and organize technical specifications, data mapping, diagrams, and flowcharts to aid in target state recommendations Translate highly technical specifications into clear non-technical requirements Manage the set-up and configuration of systems Define and coordinate the execution of testing procedures, and develop test cases to serve the overall quality assurance process Provide documentation of all processes and training as needed Implement best practices for scalability, supportability, ease of maintenance, and system performancequalifications:**Qualifications**+ Bachelor's degree in computer science or information technology, or equivalent experienceskills: **Skills**+ 10+ years experience working with information technologies and systems analysis Strong computer, hardware, software, and analytical skills Proven ability to assess business needs and translate them into relevant solutions Strong understanding and knowledge of the principles and practices associated with software development models, such as Waterfall, Iterative, Agile Experience installing, configuring, documenting, testing, training, and implementing new applications and systems Working knowledge of a wide variety of programming languages and exposure to multiple technology stacks (e.g Java, .NET) Excellent analytical skillsEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Management Analyst in Charlotte, NC.

Key Tasks:
Partner with DMI, Risk, LOB, IS, and IT teams to establish data security business processes and requirements
Identify data security control points and implement measures to integrate data security practices and requirements along the end-to-end data lifecycle
Identify and lead resolution of data security process control gaps
Partner with data domain teams to support front line data security activities through data understanding and early identification of data security requirements
Promote data security practices across the data community
Establish and operate data security governance routines
Create, maintain, and communicate data handling and accepted usage behaviors of enterprise data environment assets
Lead cross-functional initiatives to mature data security capabilities
Support/drive development of presentations, as needed, across various audiences
Provide support to ad-hoc requests as needed
REQUIREMENTS:
1+ years of experience in one or a combination of the following: data management, data analysis or data science; Or a BA/BS degree or higher in Computer Engineering, Computer Science or Electrical Engineering
To be considered for this position, candidates must have experience in a similar role, or they must possess significant knowledge, experience, and abilities to successfully perform the responsibilities listed
Start your career off on the right foot with one of 'America's Top 500 Companies', as awarded by Forbes. Our client is known as a place where people feel included, valued, supported and respected. Innovative thinking and industry-leading technology allow their associates to thrive and grow in their careers. And with a priority placed on their culture and company principles, their commitment to diversity, ethics and the communities in which they operate is their driving force.

Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,* Per client's request, no corp-to-corp and no sponsorship available **TEKsystems is actively searching for a Data Governance Analyst with extensive experience for one of our Fortune 500 clients. This position is to sit on-site in Charlotte, NC five days/week, once it safe to do so. The top skills are as follows:
A demonstrated understanding of meta-data concepts including technical/business content and data lineage
A demonstrated understanding of data quality concepts including familiarity with data quality dimensions
Excel- this is a must, there is a ton of data being held in Excel and candidates need to know how to manipulate it
Strong interpersonal and Communication skills
Must be willing to work on a W2 basis and no sponsorship is offered. Unfortunately, third party vendors will not be accepted for this role. An in-person interview is required for the role so local Charlotte, NC candidates are highly preferred.

Please apply directly to the posting for more information. Candidates that match the requirements above will then be contacted for submittal.

About TEKsystems:

We're partners in transformation. We help clients activate ideas and solutions to take advantage of a new world of opportunity. We are a team of 80,000 strong, working with over 6,000 clients, including 80% of the Fortune 500, across North America, Europe and Asia. As an industry leader in Full-Stack Technology Services, Talent Services, and real-world application, we work with progressive leaders to drive change. That's the power of true partnership. TEKsystems is an Allegis Group company.

The company is an equal opportunity employer and will consider all applications without regards to race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, veteran status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information or any characteristic protected by law.

If you would like to request a reasonable accommodation, such as the modification or adjustment of the job application process or interviewing process due to a disability, please call 888 472-3411 or email accommodation@teksystems .com for other accommodation options.

Job Requirements:,Senior Data Analyst**job details:**+ location:Charlotte, NC+ salary:$50 - $55 per hour+ date posted:Wednesday, June 17, 2020+ experience:6 Years+ job type:Contract+ industry:Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services+ reference:488008+ questions:704.972.3770.**job description**Senior Data Analystjob summary:Randstad Professionals have an excellent opportunity with a Major Financial Institution in the Uptown area of Charlotte, NC.**Required:**+ Coding experience - Must be able to code SQL from scratch+ Strong SQL skills+ Risk Management+ Audit / Assurance background+ Big 4 Advisory experience+ Expert MS Excel experience - Must complete an excel test before interview.location: Charlotte, North Carolinajob type: Contractsalary: $50 - 55 per hourwork hours: 8 to 5education: Bachelor's degreeexperience: 6 Yearsresponsibilities:**Job Requirements:**+ Will be part of a validation team+ BS/BA degree in STEM/IT related field or equivalent experience+ Solid understanding of methods in statistical analysis+ Strong analytical skills, with experience breaking down a large problem into smaller, solvable components+ Advanced understanding of statistics+ Solid skills in data extraction and transformation with Database+ Strong skills in data exploration, analysis, and visualization+ Strong development skills in programming languages such as python and SQL+ Experience with BI and data visualization tools+ Self-motivated and life time learner looking to research, explore, and develop new skills and knowledge+ Ability to collaborate with high-performing teams and individuals throughout the firm to accomplish common goals+ Ability to combine a deep understanding of business strategies with the quantitative methods and drive business decisions+ Excellent written and verbal communication skills; with the ability to communicate the results of your work in meaningful waysqualifications:If Qualified please respond with resume attached in MS Word format and email to bert.baloga@randstadusa.com to discuss further. W-2 OnlyClick To Applyskills: SQL, Excel, Data Entry, Business Analysis, AnalysisEqual Opportunity Employer: Race, Color, Religion, Sex, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, National Origin, Age, Genetic Information, Disability, Protected Veteran Status, or any other legally protected group status.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has an enterprise client in Charlotte, NC that is seeking a Senior Business Analyst/Data Analyst with strong SQL experience creating complex queries.

REQUIREMENTS:
Strong commercial lending experience and experience working with Oracle
Experience with string Data in SQL
Experience with Oracle Analytic Functions
Experience with Oracle Windows Functions
Complex SQL queries
Start your career off on the right foot with one of 'America's Top 500 Companies', as awarded by Forbes. Our client is known as a place where people feel included, valued, supported and respected. Innovative thinking and industry-leading technology allow their associates to thrive and grow in their careers. And with a priority placed on their culture and company principles, their commitment to diversity, ethics and the communities in which they operate is their driving force.

Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,A leading financial firm is seeking a Data Analyst to join their team in Charlotte, NC. Qualifications Must have a Bachelors degree in Computer Science, or related field 5+ years of relevant hands on experience Data Analysis/Data Mapping experience Oracle Database experience (PL/SQL) Banking/Financial Experience
Apply,Please let me know if you are interested in the below job opportunity. Rate 52hr on W2 QA Analyst Big DataETL - Charlotte, NC 7+ years of ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) testing experience 5 + years experience with performance testing and load testing using ETL tools like Abinitio for Big Data in Hadoop. 3+ years of experience in testing and automation for Big Data applications, such as Hadoop If you are not comfortable with the rate part then let me know your rate expectations and I'll reach you with another requirement in the future with better rates once I get any requirement. As for this requirement, this is the only best rate that we have. Thank you for understanding, -- Best Regards, Ranjan Gulati Technical Recruiter Web httpwww.canvasinfotech.com httpwww.canvasinfotech.com Email Ranjancanvasitsolutions.com mailtoRanjancanvasitsolutions.com Phone (510)-313-1121 tel(510)-313-1121,Data Management Analyst with Traded Products:Signature Consultants has an opportunity for a Data Management Analyst. In this role, the candidate will support our client's team from a Data Management perspective in analyzing, monitoring and improving critical Data Flow and Data Quality with the goal of ensuring the timeliness and accuracy of Capital calculations.

Responsibilities:

• Research & Analysis - Supporting Traded Products Counterparty Capital Management team from a Data Management perspective in analyzing, monitoring and improving critical Data Flow and Data Quality with the goal of ensuring the timeliness and accuracy of Capital calculations. Understanding the overall flow and usage of information from upstream sources and consolidation points used for capital modeling, calculation and reporting processes
• Subject Matter Expertise - Expert in the understanding of Data Flow, Data Quality and Data Usage of information from upstream sources and consolidation points into Capital for capital calculations and reporting. Be Subject Matter Expert in identifying, analyzing and solving complex data issues in an efficient, transparent and collaborative fashion.
• Data Controls - Ensuring process controls, data validation activities, Data Quality scripts and measurement processes remain timely and relevant
• Data Remediation - Meeting SLA timelines for Data Incident analysis, Defect or Enhancement classification, Action Plan creation and Target Date delivery for Monthly Data Governance Process compliance

Qualifications:

• Minimum 5 years of experience within a financial institution with hands-on experience in Data Analysis
• Understanding of Traded Products including Derivatives, Repo, Fixed Income, FX, Equities and their representation in data.
• Must be a self-motivated/self-starter and able to take ownership and self-accountability for ensuring that process controls, data validation activities, data quality scripts and measurement processes remain timely and relevant
• Hands-on experience querying and analyzing large sets of data
• Strong analytical and problem solving capabilities skills needed to perform complex data analysis
• Ability to use SQL to perform complex data profiling activities and analysis of large amounts of data for logical understanding and problem
• Ability to perform complex data lineage analysis spanning multiple source systems and data transformations from a Capital data perspective
• Strong ability to think logically and critically to develop actionable solutions that help resolve complex data issues
• Must be able to build and maintain strong and collaborative working relationships with co-workers on the TDM team as well as Capital and Technology business partners
• Ability to thrive and be energized in a challenging and dynamic environment where priorities and challenges are changing
• Ability to provide clear oral and written communication to a variety of business and technical audiences

Desired Experience:

• Ability to use advanced Excel functions such as pivot tables, VLookup, macros, Visual Basic and more to supplement advanced SQL skills in data analysis exercises
• Prior experience in performing detailed analysis of Traded Products Data defects to identify patterns or root-causes and recommend improvements to processes or data flows to prevent future defects
• Working knowledge of SAS, Python, Tableau, and UNIX
• Experience with data projects and authorized data sources for Traded Products (Derivatives, Repo, Fixed Income, FX, Equities)
• Knowledge and experience with General Ledger data and reconciliation

About Signature Consultants, LLC

Headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Signature Consultants was established in 1997 with a singular focus: to provide clients and consultants with superior staffing solutions. For the ninth consecutive year, Signature was voted as one of the "Best Staffing Firms to Work For" and is now the 14th largest IT staffing firm in the United States (source: Staffing Industry Analysts). With 28 locations throughout North America, Signature annually deploys thousands of consultants to support, run, and manage their clients' technology needs. Signature offers IT staffing, consulting, managed solutions, and direct placement services. For more information on the company, please visit www.sigconsult.com. Signature Consultants is the parent company to Hunter Hollis and Madison Gunn.

Job Requirements:,Immediate need for immediate need for Data Analyst. We are looking for Data Analysts and Analytics Consultants at all stages in their career to work for a Fortune 500 global Financial Institution.
Our client company has received multiple awards over the past few years, including Top 50 Companies for Diversity, Great Workplace Award, and Top Company for Veterans.They need analysts with extensive experience using Teradata SQL, SAS, Python, and Tableau. They need strong problem solvers, who are able to interpret data, and suggest appropriate action plans. Excellent communication skills, oral and written, are also required.
Our client is very interested in candidates with at least 2+ years directly applicable work experience, or at least a Bachelors Degree in any of the following subjects:
• Mathematics
• Statistics
• Engineering
• Physics
• Economics
• Computer Science

Our client company is looking to hire very quickly. Be part of an innovative team and send your resume over today!,Position: Data Analyst
Contract: 2-3 weeks
Start Date: Next week 6/15 or 6/16
Location: 100% remote

Must Have Skills...
UA experience

2-3 years of experience
Marketing background/exp working with marketing teams
Tableau and SQL experience, biggest tools they use
Data Analytics exp
Nice to Have Skills...
Background from Mobile UA and gaming companies like Zynga, EA, Etc.
Day-to-Day:
Will need to sign NDA
Need someone who will be able to ramp up quickly
Using the campaigns and back end data, looking to improve retention, daily active users, looking at INT and what makes sense and turning that into dashboards like Tableau
Interact with our studio data analytics team and Andy's (VP) team on relevant projects
Core focus will be running analysis on paid marketing campaign performance, creating reports and dashboards using SQL, Tableau, etc.
Potential projects could include but not limited to, cohort analysis, segment creations, data QA.
Should be comfortable digging into databases and see where relevant data is housed
Google, FB, retention data, event confusion, investments and campaigns
Bring ideas to the table for more effectiveness and working with marketing data,My client is looking for a User Acquisition Data Analyst to join their team!

Position: User Acquisition Data Analyst
Contract: 3+ months (possible contract-to-hire)
Start Date: Next week
Location: 100% remote

Must Have Skills...
User Acquisition experience
Marketing background/exp working with marketing teams
Tableau and SQL experience, biggest tools they use
Data Analytics exp
Nice to Have Skills...
Background from Mobile UA and gaming companies like Zynga, EA, Etc.
Day-to-Day:
Using the campaigns and back end data, looking to improve retention, daily active users, looking at INT and what makes sense and turning that into dashboards like Tableau
Interact with our studio data analytics team
Core focus will be running analysis on paid marketing campaign performance, creating reports and dashboards using SQL, Tableau, etc.
Potential projects could include but not limited to, cohort analysis, segment creations, data QA.
Should be comfortable digging into databases and see where relevant data is housed
Google, FB, retention data, event confusion, investments and campaigns
Bring ideas to the table for more effectiveness and working with marketing data,Job Summary:
Company: Artech Information Systems LLC
Position: Data Analyst
Duration: 6 months with possible extension
Location: San Francisco, CA
Job Reference Code: 20-23328

Position Overview:
The Data Analyst will need to analyze various data sets and provide directive insight based on trending. The primary responsibility for this role is to pull the data from a variety of websites and then to organize it in pivot tables in Excel.

Skill/Experience/Education
Mandatory:
Bachelor's degree, 3+ years of work experience, knows SQL, Google Slides, Google Sheets, Google Docs
Desired:
One year of experience in an ad sales, ad support, finance, data science, or strategy and operations role.
Experience with statistical analysis and modelling.
Niyaz Ansari
Assistant Manager – Staffing
Artech Information Systems LLC
360 Mt. Kemble Avenue, Suite 2000 | Morristown, NJ 07960
Office: 973.967-3588 | Fax: 973.998.2599
Email: Niyaz.Ansari@artechinfo.com | Website: www.artechinfo.com
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/niyazansari/

Connect with us on - LinkedIn | Facebook | Twitter

About Artech Information Systems LLC
Artech is an employer-of-choice for over 5,800 consultants across the globe. We recruit top-notch talent for over 65 Fortune and Government clients coast-to-coast across the U.S., India, and China. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us!
Want to read more about Artech?
Click here to visit our website or click on the following links to read what others are saying about us: The Wall Street Journal, Forbes (1) (2), BusinessWire, Entrepreneur, Better Business Bureau, Hoovers, Diversity Careers(1) (2), The Artech Circle, NJTVOnline, The Business Forum Show, and SIA: “Above the Crowd.”
Connect with Artech through Social Media
Learn more about our company including the latest events at Artech, new job opportunities, jobseeker tips, and more. Follow us on Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Twitter, and YouTube.\,Location: San Francisco, CAPosition Description:

The Data Analyst will need to analyze various data sets and provide directive insight based on trending. The primary responsibility for this role is to pull the data from a variety of websites and then to organize it in pivot tables in Excel.

This person will help with data management and reporting for creative requests that come through go/SVA.

• Onboarding
Understand Creative Services Teams
Team mapping of Creative Services teams in each region
Different creative services offered by each team
How teams prioritize and capacity constraints
Commonly used descriptions for these services
Understand Partner Teams
Meet contacts across GTM, YT/V, and Sales
Understand which contacts to work with to gather regional reporting
Understand Sales
Which sellers are allowed to request services (i.e. are services gated or not)
• Data management
Partner with Creative Services teams or regional GTM
Work with SVA Admin Owners to drive data consistency across inputs
Host office hours as needed
Flag missing information or data gaps to the SVA Admin Owner
Do routine checks to make sure data isnt pulling inaccurately
Flag potential bugs to GSL StratOps Team or Tools team
• Data metrics
Coordinate with GSL StratOps for
Revenue
Product Adoption
Seller Satisfaction
Client Satisfaction
Other metrics
Check for bugs / issues in reporting dashboard
• Reporting
Share bi-weekly updates via email or slides with global GSL StratOps Team
Flag if compliance / usage seem low (i.e. high likelihood sellers in region are not using go/SVA)
Job Requirements:
Skill/Experience/Education
Mandatory

• Bachelor's degree
• 3+ years of work experience
• Knows SQL
• Knows Google Slides, Google Sheets, Google Docs

Desired

• One year of experience in an ad sales, ad support, finance, data science, or strategy and operations role.
• Experience with statistical analysis and modelling.
• Knowledge of Google internal databases like Ads F1, Analytics configstore, ASR, Tangle, or XP.
• Knowledge of Google internal tools and systems like Plx, DasNav, F1, and Critique.
• Deep familiarity with Google Ads, Search Ads 360, Analytics 360, or Attribution.
• Basic knowledge of any programming language.

As an equal opportunity employer, ICONMA prides itself on creating an employment environment that supports and encourages the abilities of all persons regardless of race, color, gender, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or disability.

.,Software Guidance Assistance, Inc., (SGA), is searching for a REMOTE Data Analyst Consultant for a contract assignment with one of our premier financial services clients. STRONG SQL JIRAAGILE TRUE DATA ANALYST BACKGROUND STRONG COMMUNICATION MARKETINGFINANCE Responsibilities Responsible for putting together metrics and data element documentation as POC development is happening Replicating data elements from campaign execution tables in the sandbox. Working with data modelers to make sure the model meets the needs of the business. Rules Engine and campaign execution tools- can work off the model that is being built. Create "Staffing populations. Responsible for converting POCs into use cases in JIRA Required Skills Should have some experience working with marketing data which will help with understanding the processes. Needs to be more analyst than technical and Data Lineage Needs to have good SQL skills ( streamline and pull requirements data) Resource needs to be a self-starter as we are all spread thin and have little time to handhold. SGA is a Certified Women's Business Enterprise (WBE) celebrating over thirty years of service to our national client base for both permanent placement and consulting opportunities. For consulting positions, we offer a variety of benefit options including but not limited to health dental insurance, paid vacation, timely payment via direct deposit. SGA accepts transfers of H1 sponsorship for most contracting roles. We are unable to sponsor for Right-to-Hire, Fulltime, or Government roles. All parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply for all roles. Only those authorized to work for government entities will be considered for government roles. Please inquire about our referral program if you would like to submit a candidate for any of our open or future job opportunities. SGA is an EEO employer. We encourage Veterans to apply. To view all of our available job postings andor to learn more about SGA please visit us online at www.sgainc.com httpwww.sgainc.com .,Pharmacovigilance Operations Associate (Data Analyst)
6 month contract
South San Francisco
Supports all MAP Operations related activities
Perform reconciliation related activities for Market Research Patient (MAP) support programs and responsible for tasks related to MAP Global Tracking Tool (GTT) to ensure continuous data integrity.
Run operational metrics reports on a routine basis, identify follow-up's required, and work with the appropriate PV Operations head and/or vendor lead to ensure appropriate follow-up is completed.
Oversees operational aspects of US MAP Service Provider Qualification Process including: curation and upkeep of US MAP Service Provider qualification portal, ensuring consistency and fidelity of all Service Provider lists, management and assignment of new assessments to PV Operations head and/or vendor lead
Responsible for executing Source Data QC (SDQC) of in scope MAPs on a quarterly basis. This includes: a) Communication with MAP vendors; b) management of vendor conducting SDQC, including appropriate QC; receiving, QC and tracking data files.
Supports all study management related activities
Responsible for oversight, triage, and tracking of incoming study document review request
Responsible for performing Case Transmission Verification (CTV)
Ensuring all USMA studies have been reviewed by PV Clinical Group
Performs Outbound Submission and Tracking (OST) for literature ICSRs and submits relevant documentation to health authority
Identifies compliance trends and formulates action plan as needed to address compliance issues.
Skills:
Competencies Identified for Success:
Ability to translate complex data trends to actionable steps
Demonstrates strong business expertise related to PV environment
Can be recent graduate.
Education:
Education, Experience, and Other Requirements:
Minimum Bachelor's degree (Preferred)
Degree in Life Science or related field (Preferred)
Demonstrates expertise in computer skills and database experience (i.e Microsoft office Suite) (Preferred).
Writing experience; science/medical writing highly desirable.
Ability to travel as required
Health Care Professional NOT required
Company Description:

About Ascent:

Ascent is a leading national technology consulting and professional services firm that focuses on tactical and strategic consulting. Ascents fundamental business is providing staffing services to Large Enterprise clients in our core market verticals: Financial Services, Healthcare, and Life Sciences. We focus the majority of our efforts in Staff Augmentation support of Large Enterprise Clients who utilize a Vendor Management System. Ascent works as both a reliable supplier in support of programs, as well as a Strategic Advisor in support of enterprise efforts to establish best in class preferred vendor programs. Ascent was ranked in the 2007 and 2008 Inc. 500 and recognized specifically for its innovative work in staff augmentation support of Large Enterprise preferred vendor accounts.

If you are ready to propel your career to new heights read on. We are looking for talented and dedicated colleagues to join our phenomenal team. At Ascent, we have created an environment where culture, commitment and opportunity converge to yield a truly unique place to work. We know that every employee has something important to say and that every employee is integral to our success. Where else can you walk over to a founder and talk about your ideas to help build our business and have that idea implemented in 48 hours? More importantly, we do everything we can to make sure our employees not only have great jobs, but great lives.,Net2Source is a Global Workforce Solutions Company headquartered at NJ, USA with its branch offices in Asia Pacific Region. We are one of the fastest growing IT Consulting company across the USA and we are hiring "Job Title" for our client. We offer a wide gamut of consulting solutions customized to our 450+ clients ranging from Fortune 500/1000 to Start-ups across various verticals like Technology, Financial Services, Healthcare, Life Sciences, Oil & Gas, Energy, Retail, Telecom, Utilities, Technology, Manufacturing, the Internet, and Engineering.

Position: Data Analyst
Location: SFO, CA
Hire Type: Contract

Job Description:
• 5+ years of experience in IT and banking field with 3+ experience in SQL Server/Oracle or other database query language
• Understand and update business reporting and processes which will reduce duplication of data, reduce data entry into multiple systems and facilitate quicker data driven business decisions and document the details for technology team to understand
• Work with end users, business analysts and developers to streamline data flowing in to the applications.
• Export and manipulate data from business systems to be used in reports and analysis
• Setup graphs and presentations to visually represent information using Excel and/or Tableau
• Experience with creating, documenting, and maintaining processes
• Develop presentations and produce clear data visualizations for multiple levels of staff, management, and variety of stakeholders
• Implement methods to improve data reliability and quality
• Creative in solving problems, especially thinking outside-the-box to come up with solutions
• An ideal resource loves working with data
• Strong analytical skills with high attention to detail and accuracy
• Excellent verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills
Nice to Have
• Finance/Banking background
• Experience or have good understanding of Data Governance domain

About Net2Source, Inc.
Net2Source is an employer-of-choice for over 2200+ consultants across the globe. We recruit top-notch talent for over 40 Fortune and Government clients coast-to-coast across the U.S. We are one of the fastest-growing companies in the U.S. and this may be your opportunity to join us!
Want to read more about Net2Source?, Visit us at www.net2source.com

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
The United States Government does not discriminate in employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), national origin, political affiliation, sexual orientation, marital status, disability, genetic information, age, membership in an employee organization, retaliation, parental status, military service, or other non-merit factor.

Net2Source Inc. is one of the fastest growing Global Workforce Solutions company with a growth of 100% YoY for last consecutive 3 years with over 2200+ employees globally and 30 locations in US and operations in 20 countries. With an experience of over a decade we offer unmatched workforce solutions to our clients by developing an in-depth understanding of their business needs. We specialize in Contingent hiring, Direct Hires, Statement of Work, Payroll Management, IC Compliance, VMS, RPO and Managed IT Services.

Fast Facts about Net2Source:
• Inception in 2007, privately held, Debt free
• 2200+ employees globally
• 375+ In- house Team of Sales, Account Management and Recruitment with coast to coast COE.
• 30 offices in US and 50+ Offices globally
• Operations in 20 countries (US, Canada, Mexico, APAC, UK, UAE, Europe, , Europe, Latin America, Japan, Australia)

Awards and Accolades:
• 2018 – Fastest Growing IT Staffing Firm in North America by Staffing Industry Analysts
• 2018 – Fastest-Growing Private Companies in America as a 5 times consecutive honoree – Inc. 5000
• 2018 – Fastest 50 by NJBiz
• 2018 – Techserve Excellence Award (IT and Engineering Staffing)
• 2018 – Best of the Best Platinum Award by Agile1
• 2018 – 40 Under 40 Award Winner by Staffing Industry Analysts
• 2018 – CEO World Gold Award by SVUS
• 2017 – Best of the Best Gold Award by Agile1

Thanks,

Pallav Saxena
Account & Delivery Manager
Direct: (201) 258-5694 | Board : (201) 340-8700 Ext. 574 | Fax: (201) 221-8131
Pallav.saxena@net2source.com
Address: 317 George St., Suite 220, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
Website: www.net2source.com,Position Number: 341347

Location: San Francisco, CA 94105

Position Type: Temporary

Required Skill Set:
Data Analyst, DATA MANAGEMENT, SalesForce

Position Description:
*C2C is not available**
*Only U.S. Citizens and those authorized to work in the U.S. can be considered as W2 candidates.**
Job Title: Master Data Analyst – SAP MDG Platform
Duration: 6 months, with the possibility of conversion
Location: San Francisco

Description:
Ready to shake things up? Join us as we pursue our disruptive new vision to make machine data accessible, usable and valuable to everyone. We are a company filled with people who are passionate about our product and strive to deliver the best experience for our customers. We’re committed to our work, customers, having fun, and most importantly to each other’s success.
Our clinet is growing its Enterprise Data Management team to focus on master data management and governance strategy and operations.
As the Master Data Management (MDM) analyst you will help us define & build master data operations for our new ERP deployment of S/4 Hana. You’ll work with business partners in Finance and Sales to identify the critical data and rules necessary to deliver customer, material, vendor, profit center, cost center, fixed assets & GL account mastering for business operations. You’ll partner with Data Quality and IT to to build an offshore operations model for master data maintenance. You will help us ensure clear standard operating procedures. (SOP) & service level agreements (SLA) are documented and governed across different master data objects. Because our long-term vision is to invest in MDM tooling and automation, you''ll bring your technical expertise in SAP MDG to bear, and ensure maintenance processes we deploy are easily adaptable for this future investment.

Responsibilities:
• Develop master data creation/update processes for core master data objects (customer, vendor, material) and core financial data objects (profit center, cost center, fixed asset, GL accounts etc.)
• Run workshops with cross functional groups to define, review & approve processes
• Define a shared service model to maintain master data
• Onboard and train offshore team
• Operationalize MDM support including escalation & performance monitoring

Education & Experience
• Undergraduate degree in Statistics, Engineering, Computer Sciences, Finance, Accounting, or related field
• 3+ years of business experience with financial operations and reporting processes
• Minimum 3 years of experience in master data management practices.
• Ability to engage and communicate at manager level and above to provide clear, concise explanations of data governance concepts, programs and initiatives
• Demonstrable experience working within complex, federated data and system architecture
• Experience working both automated and non-automated master data operations models

Desired Skills:
• Prior experience of implementing SAP Master Data Governance (MDG)
• Working experience in SAP BODS, SAP Information Steward
• Experience with SalesForce (SFDC) master data
• Design and use of Google Forms, ServiceNow, or similar for change management
• Workshop planning & leadership
• Clear understanding of match/merge and survivorship rules for master data
• Process mapping, data cataloging
• Understanding and use of process metrics to monitor and maintain effectiveness of operations

#CBRose#,Hi,

Title: Data Analyst w/ Tealium

Location: Remote Work

Position type: 6 + Months Contract

Rate : Market (Best possible)

Jobs Description:

● Tealium/GTM and Google Analytics / Adobe Analytics Implementations, deploying and managing tags.

● Handle the end to end web analytics solutions using Tealium/GTM that includes Implementation, Quality Assurance and Reporting.

● Address Ad-hoc GTM/Tealium/Google Analytics requests raised by the client.

● Create Pathing Reports testing specific Customer Paths to conversion.

● Enable the Marketing teams with the ability to analyze real-time campaign information.

Additional requirements:

● Experience using a data visualization tools

● Provides initial technical implementation guidelines for new website features

● Collaborates with analytics dev team to create technical specifications for new website. features.

● Translate complex and analytical work into easy to understand data points

● Understands the business KPI (Traffic and Conversion metrics)

● Performs data quality audits, QA tags, identifies data collection issues, suggests improvements, and implements fixes.

Note: If interested please send your updated resume and include your rate requirement along with your contact details with a suitable time when we can reach you. If you know of anyone in your sphere of contacts, who would be a perfect match for this job then, we would appreciate if you can forward this posting to them with a copy to us.,Job Description
Primary Skills: Risk analytics, Bigdata, Tableau, SQL, Finance/Payments, Business Systems Analysis
Duration: 12 Months + (High possibility of conversion*)
Contract Type: W2/C2C

Note: Remote

Overview:
This role is on the Risk Analytics & MIS team, where we have a simple mission: turn massive amounts of data into actionable insights that ensure seamless, secure commerce experiences across client’s physical and digital eco-system. Our analytic and data professionals deliver on this mission by implementing data based solutions, analysis and insights targeted at maintaining security, reducing fraud rates and preserving the integrity of the largest payment processing network in the world.
Data analytics is a critical pillar of the Risk organization. To be successful in this role, you will use strong analytical and leadership skills, contextual business sense and a creative flair to solve real world challenges for client’s and our clients. Your expertise and insights will serve as a beacon to guide business decisions based on data. Directly reports to the Global Head of Risk Analytics & MIS.
Qualifications:
Must have: 8+ years of work experience with a Bachelor's Degree; 7 years of work experience with an Advanced degree (e.g. Masters/MBA/JD/MD); or a minimum of 5 years of work experience with a PhD
Preferred:10-12+ years of experience with a Bachelor's Degree (quantitative field preferred) or 10 years of experience with an Advanced Degree (quantitative or business degree highly desirable). Demonstration of progressive success in roles of increasing responsibility.
Expertise in delivering data insights, strategic planning and analytic strategy is highly desirable.
Extensive experience in risk, banking or financial services is required. knowledge of the payments industry is highly desirable.
Risk operations or Risk analytics experience or similar quantitative business responsibility for financial or operational performance highly desirable.
Strong understanding of manipulating data from a variety of sources
Big data experience (Hadoop, Hive, Spark), data visualization experience (Tableau) and/or SQL experience are critical skills – this role is about both doing and delivering
To follow up with any questions please contact Sagar @ 408-907-7680

Akraya is an award-winning IT staffing firm and the staffing partner of choice for many leading companies across the US. We offer comprehensive benefits including Health Insurance (medical, dental, and vision), Cafeteria Plan (HSA, FSA, and dependent care), 401(k) (enrollment subject to eligibility), and Sick Pay (varies based on city and state laws).

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit at one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client that is seeking client is seeking a Data Analyst to coordinate changes to computer databases, test, and implement the database applying knowledge of database management systems.

Job Responsibilities:
Executes test, data extraction, and analysis utilizing the department's various computer software packages within established deadlines
Prepares, and documents detailed specifications of the programs utilized to pull data
Creation and use of documents to facilitate the request and data integrity of the data that is provided to the internal customer
May analyze and make recommends on business, technology, and process improvement opportunities
Partners with various business lines to perform data analysis procedures as applicable to the support of ongoing projects
Generates ad hoc reports and regular datasets or report information for end-users using system tools and database or data warehouse queries
Work with senior management, technical and client teams in order to determine data requirements, business data implementation approaches, best practices for advanced data manipulation, storage and analysis strategies
Write and code logical and physical database descriptions and specify identifiers of database to management system or direct others in coding descriptions
Modify existing databases and database management systems and/or direct programmers and analysts to make changes
Test programs or databases, correct errors and make necessary modifications
REQUIREMENTS:
Bachelor's degree in a technical field such as Computer Science, computer engineering or related field required
8-10 years applicable experience required
Experience with database technologies
Knowledge of the ETL process
Knowledge of at least one scripting language
Experience in building relational data structures, including relationships between tables and grouping data
Technical skills to manipulate and analyze data in a variety of formats (e.g. SAS, SQL, Access, JCL)
Strong written and oral communication skills
Strong troubleshooting and problem solving skills
Demonstrated history of success
Desire to be working with data and helping businesses make better data driven decisions
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Job Description


Job #: 1073316

Location: SF (will begin 100% remote)

12 Month contract

To apply, please email a resume to jabernathy@apexsystems.com

The Alerts Platform is used to communicate servicing messages to customers via email, push and SMS. These messages are generally customer product usage driven – account statement ready notifications, balance updates, credit card usage notices, etc. The platform is highly automated and has elaborate interconnections with upstream product systems to send several billion messages annually.

This new role is with the Ad Hoc Alerts Team, which is part of the Alerts Platform product management group. The Ad Hoc team leverages key aspects of the Alerts Platform to provide customized, manually executed, one-time or limit duration alerts. The team works with alert requestors from a wide array of product areas across the bank and facilitates the entire end-to-end process. This starts with developing content and targeting specifications, insuring all needed controls have been passed, spending a considerable amount of time performing the actual setup and execution of the alert and finally, following up with post-send analysis and investigations as needed.

Primary responsibilities for this role may include but are not limited to:
Effectively juggle multiple ad hoc communication efforts simultaneously while working across varying business lines in a fast-paced, deadline driven, dynamic environment
Set up message content and targeting data files while performing quality assurance activities on both
Proactively shift between the detail and big picture aspects of the work at hand. This involves being detail oriented to detect problems, for example, with data formats or content issues like missing punctuation or broken hyperlinks. It also involves stepping back to ask questions when all the assembled pieces of the communication effort do not seem to yield a coherent customer experience.
Collaborate with line of business partners and various functional support teams including legal, communication, technology and analytics in support of the communications initiatives.
Required Qualifications
6+ years of experience in one or a combination of the following: digital business analysis, data analysis, content publishing, digital platforms, digital consulting
Strong, clear and concise written and oral communication skills
Ability to execute in a fast paced, high demand, environment while balancing multiple priorities
Experience using Microsoft Excel to manipulate data sets
Desired Qualifications
Ability to dissect technical problems, analyze data, and recommend potential solutions
Experience collaborating with cross functional business partners and supporting various business lines within a large corporation
Experience with content management applications, including Tridion Content Management System
Knowledge and understanding of project management principles: tracking deliverables and coordinating tasks and activities
Experience with various forms of digital messaging platforms (Email, SMS, Push, etc.)
EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,Title: Sr. Business Systems Analyst
Location: San Francisco, CA
Type: Long-Term Contract

Overview

The Sr. Business Systems Analyst acts as a liaison between business users and technical teams involved in planning, conducting, and directing the analysis of complex business problems.

The Sr. Business Systems Analyst supports multiple business units in building and improving the data infrastructure around loans and deposits transactional data.

The Sr. Business Systems Analyst builds use cases and writes business requirements and technical specifications that ensure business units receive the correct data sets for analytics for internal and external reporting.

Responsibilities
Develop detailed data mapping documents encompassing business, transformation and data quality rules that address data definition normalization across deposits and loan transactions.
Document business and functional requirements for short-term and long-term management reporting, regulatory reporting, dashboards, and analytical needs of business units.
Perform data analysis and design activities at the operational and organizational level to build a central repository (single source of truth) for transactional data.
Develop reporting prototypes with the goal of industrialization in a controlled environment.
Engage and direct business partners and subject matter experts to identify priorities, scope, and requirements for complex business systems problems.
Engage with technical development team members to acquire requirements and determine appropriate design approach.
Support the build out and expansion of existing deposits and Loan data marts to address evolving business needs in the areas of transactions and originations.
Plan and execute QA and UAT testing with test cases.
Act as the Business and Data Analyst who liaisons between business units and the project team.
Document reference data and meta data for each release of transactions data store.
Experience
10+ years of business and data analysis experience in the implementation of data-related solutions.
7+ years of business and data analysis experience in the implementation of data marts and other data related solutions.
5+ years of banking or financial services industry experience in the domain of loans, deposits, brokerage and wealth management.
3+ years of experience in the delivery of regulatory or risk reporting solutions in banking or the financial services industry.
Excellent SQL skills to analyze, profile data, and build report prototypes before handing over to ETL team.
Ability to communicate complex ideas as easy to understand concepts.
Ability to present effectively to both business and technical audiences at all levels of organization.
Excellent written and oral communications skills
Ability to clearly define projects, objectives, goals, schedules, and assignments.
Ability to work on ad hoc requests like point analytics or reports to support existing data engineering team.
Experience working with onsite and offshore vendor partners in the execution of data projects is preferred.
Experience with UAT test cases and scripts to test the rollout of different phases of the data mart is preferred.,Job Title: Business Data Analyst - Senior/Director
Location: San Francisco, CA
Duration: 12 Months

This role is on the Risk Analytics & MIS team, where we have a simple mission: turn massive amounts of data into actionable insights that ensure seamless, secure commerce experiences across ***'s physical and digital eco-system. Our analytic and data professionals deliver on this mission by implementing data based solutions, analysis and insights targeted at maintaining security, reducing fraud rates and preserving the integrity of the largest payment processing network in the world.

Data analytics is a critical pillar of the Risk organization. To be successful in this role, you will use strong analytical and leadership skills, contextual business sense and a creative flair to solve real world challenges for *** and our clients. Your expertise and insights will serve as a beacon to guide business decisions based on data. Directly reports to the Global Head of Risk Analytics & MIS.

Essential Functions:
Deliver on analytics initiatives for NA + LAC which deliver data-driven insights to internal and external stakeholders. This will include both aesthetic and technical assets, as well as regular ad-hoc work, for internal executive stakeholders, issuing banks, acquirers, processors and merchants. The ability to balance a holistic global view with customized regional delivery is crucial to success. Through collaboration with our client facing teams and functional leaders, you will bring data and insights to bear which deliver mutual, tangible value to *** and our clients by way of improved payment security. Specific responsibilities include:

• Execute on the global Risk analytic strategy for specific initiatives and various regional priorities, spearheading creation of data assets and delivery of insights
• Compare client performance against industry best practices; inject new perspectives with a shrewd eye toward identifying performance and/or profitability improvement opportunities. Move the organization from interesting to actionable with recommendations that drive lower fraud rates, more seamless commerce and improved experiences for players in our eco-system
• Craft meaningful presentations and insights from complex data with content that clearly presents opportunities in an accurate, understandable and engaging manner; ensure data driven decision making is a priority for clients, colleagues, and other internal stakeholders
• Identify macro business and market trends that guide areas of future analysis
• Translate understanding of ***'s products and services into client engagement strategies that yield financial and performance benefits
• Serve as a strategic advisor to organizational leadership and peers – inclusive of Risk MIS team, Regional Risk Officers, Functional/Global leaders and the Regional President.
• Mature how our analytic capabilities are integrated into business processes, improving delivery effectiveness
• Cultivate deep cross-functional partnerships, building relationship capital that facilitates the advancement of holistic/strategic initiatives
• Be an expert at getting to the root of a problem, defining business objectives and formalizing data requirements – especially in a fast paced, fluid environment
• Influence tools and capabilities strategy through experience with various data environments, data sources and tools
• Exceptional risk and/or business acumen and technical rigor – be able to seamlessly shift between working with data to conversations with executives

Basic Qualifications:
8+ years of work experience with a Bachelor's Degree; 7 years of work experience with an Advanced degree (e.g. Masters/MBA/JD/MD); or a minimum of 5 years of work experience with a PhD

Preferred Qualifications:
• 12+ years of experience with a Bachelor's Degree (quantitative field preferred) or 10 years of experience with an Advanced Degree (quantitative or business degree highly desirable). Demonstration of progressive success in roles of increasing responsibility
• Possess a relentless, client-centric and result-driven mindset coupled with strong problem solving skills and an ability to break down complex problems and propose alternative, new ways of thinking.
• Expertise in delivering data insights, strategic planning and analytic strategy is highly desirable
• Extensive experience in risk, banking or financial services is required. *** experience or knowledge of the payments industry is highly desirable
• Risk operations or Risk analytics experience or similar quantitative business responsibility for financial or operational performance highly desirable
• Strong understanding of manipulating data from a variety of sources
• Big data experience (Hadoop, Hive, Spark), data visualization experience (Tableau) and/or SQL experience are critical skills – this role is about both doing and delivering
• Strong verbal, written, motivational and interpersonal skills are required.

Work Hours:
Incumbent must make themselves available during core business hours. May require occasional meetings outside of core business hours to connect with global partners.
Physical Requirements:
This position will be performed in an office setting. The position will require the incumbent to sit and stand at a desk, communicate in person and by telephone, frequently operate standard office equipment, such as telephones and computers.
Can work Remote/Virtual - Will be supporting two regions LAC and NA, must be able to work core hours.,Job Title: Senior Business Systems Analyst

Location: San Francisco, CA
Type: Long-Term Contract

Overview

The Senior Business Systems Analyst acts as a liaison between business systems users and technical teams and is involved in planning, conducting, and directing the analysis of complex business systems problems.

The Senior Business Systems Analyst supports multiple business units in building and improving the data infrastructure around loan and deposits transaction data.

The Senior Business Systems Analyst builds use cases and writes business requirements and technical specifications to ensure that business units receive the correct data sets for internal and external analytics reporting.

Responsibilities
Develop detailed data mapping documents encompassing business systems transformation and data quality rules that address data definition normalization across deposits and loan transaction databases.
Document business and functional requirements for short-term and long-term management reporting, regulatory reporting, dashboards, and analytical needs of business units.
Perform data analysis and design activities at the operational and organizational level to build a central repository (single source of truth) for transactional data.
Develop reporting prototypes with the goal of industrialization in a controlled environment.
Engage and direct business partners and subject matter experts to identify priorities, scope, and requirements for complex business systems problems.
Engage with technical development team members to acquire requirements and determine appropriate design approach.
Support the build out and expansion of existing deposit and loan data marts to address evolving business needs.
Plan and execute QA and UAT testing utilizing test cases
Act as the Business and Data Analyst who liaisons between business units and project teams.
Document reference data and meta data for each release of transactions data store.
Experience
10+ years of business and data analysis experience in the implementation of data-related solutions.
5+ years of financial services industry experience in the domain of deposits and loans is required.
Excellent SQL skills to analyze, profile data, and build report prototypes before handing over to ETL team.
Ability to communicate complex ideas as easy to understand concepts.
Ability to present effectively to both business and technical audiences at all levels of organization.
Must possess excellent written and oral communications skills
Ability to clearly define projects, objectives, goals, schedules, and assignments.
Ability to work on ad hoc requests like point analytics or reports to support existing data engineering team.
Previous experience working with onsite and offshore vendor partners in the execution of data projects is preferred.
Experience with UAT test cases and scripts to test the roll out of different phases of the data mart is preferred.,We have an update on the job description.

Please see:

Location Preferences/Possible Travel: 100% onsite with some remote flexibility. . Only considering candidates to work onsite in Oakland. If candidate is open to relocating themselves, please feel free to submit. Parking is not free and KP does NOT reimburse. Must take public transport or pay (near Bart).
Remote: no, 100% onsite. However due to Covid19, this position will work remotely until the Covid19 restrictions are lifted.
Position may extend/convert to FTE based on budget needs and budget. ONLY submit candidates who are eligible to convert to FTE.

Position Title: Data/BI Engineer

Top 3-5 Daily Responsibilities:
• Gather and translate business data and reporting requirements into technical design and build reporting database across multiple data sources to meet business reporting needs.
• Work with business partners to gather and understand requirements, analyze data, design data model, develop detailed source-to-target mapping from multiple sources, develop ETL/ELT, test and validate, trouble-shoot and develop fixes, etc.
• Write complex SQL code across multiple data sources to produce the data and reporting that meet business needs.
• Analyze data quality across multiple databases, proactively identify and resolve issues
• Work with BI dashboard developer to produce accurate, easy to read, useful information

Top 3-5 Required Skills:
• 3+ years of experience working with business partners to translate data and reporting needs to database design and reporting tables.
• 3+ years of experience designing and implementing dimensional and 3NF data marts in SQL Server, Snowflake, (Nice to have: Snowflake, Azure or other data platforms.)
• 3+ years of experience with designing and developing scalable and reliable ETL/ ELT process across multiple complex data sources using advanced SQL, Stored Procedures and SSIS.
• Experience working with business partners to produce reporting that meet their needs

Desired Skills: (not required)
• Cloud data platform experience (Snowflake, Azure or others)
• Multi-channel Marketing data experience
• BI dashboard development experience (Tableau, Power BI, etc.)

Soft Skills:
Proactive, take initiatives, open to learn but also open to share knowledge
Communicate effectively with technical and non-technical partners
Collaborative team player,Please contact Meera Makam at 925 627 4935 or email mmakam@ascentsg.com for any questions

Title: Sr. Healthcare Analyst
Location: Alameda, CA
Duration: Fulltime

The Senior Healthcare Analyst is responsible for supporting the analytic needs of the Alliance. This position requires an in-depth understanding of healthcare data (e.g. member, claims, clinical and provider data) and operations coupled with an extensive knowledge of large data set development, quantitative data analysis methodology and analytical tools for reporting. The Senior Healthcare Analyst, reporting to the Director, Healthcare Analytics, routinely supports business decisions and operational processes and frequently interacts with other key management staff.


Principal responsibilities include:
-Develop complex end-to-end reporting processes to support a variety of functions.
-Lead special projects, lending data expertise and actionable insights. Examples include operational, data warehouse, and third party projects.
-Identify and support areas of analytical focus for the organization's service delivery/performance and evaluation of potential areas of opportunity and risk.
-Identify and communicate operational impact of analytical findings/decision support.
-Create data sets, extract and synthesize data; conduct and interpret quantitative and qualitative analyses.
-Develop exception reporting and conduct drill-down analysis to proactively identify specific variances in medical costs and utilization.
-Generate a quality work product, presentable for content and audience, in a timely manner while maintaining strong attention to detail.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS OF THE JOB
-Data analysis
-Report and presentation development.
-Consult with managers, IT, and employee users.
-Perform quality process review.
-Develop and oversee maintenance of reporting templates
-Comply with the organization's Code of Conduct, all regulatory and contractual requirements, organizational policies, procedures, and internal controls.

MINIMUM YEARS OF ADDITIONAL RELATED EXPERIENCE:
-Minimum three years of experience in a managed care, hospital, or similar setting.
-Minimum three years of experience in data systems.

SPECIAL QUALIFICATIONS (SKILLS, ABILITIES, LICENSE):
-In-depth knowledge of healthcare principles and data.
-SQL, Access, Excel and reporting software knowledge required.
-Experience in working with relational databases, large data sets and multiple data sources required.
-Experience with Business Objects, PowerPoint, and healthcare transactional systems preferred.

Please contact Meera Makam at 925 627 4935 or email mmakam@ascentsg.com for any questions


Company Description:

About Ascent:
Ascent is a leading national technology consulting and professional services firm that focuses on tactical and strategic consulting. Ascents fundamental business is providing staffing services to Large Enterprise clients in our core market verticals: Financial Services, Healthcare, and Life Sciences. We focus the majority of our efforts in Staff Augmentation support of Large Enterprise Clients who utilize a Vendor Management System. Ascent works as both a reliable supplier in support of programs, as well as a Strategic Advisor in support of enterprise efforts to establish best in class preferred vendor programs. Ascent was ranked in the 2007 and 2008 Inc. 500 and recognized specifically for its innovative work in staff augmentation support of Large Enterprise preferred vendor accounts.
If you are ready to propel your career to new heights read on. We are looking for talented and dedicated colleagues to join our phenomenal team. At Ascent, we have created an environment where culture, commitment and opportunity converge to yield a truly unique place to work. We know that every employee has something important to say and that every employee is integral to our success. Where else can you walk over to a founder and talk about your ideas to help build our business and have that idea implemented in 48 hours? More importantly, we do everything we can to make sure our employees not only have great jobs, but great lives.,Please contact Meera Makam at 925 627 4935 or email mmakamascentsg.com for any questions Required Skills The ideal candidate will have Advanced knowledge of SAS and SQL Advanced knowledge of Data and Analytics Strong knowledge of Business Systems Architecture and Relational Databases Strong knowledge of SDLCRDLC development methodologies Strong knowledge of Visual Analytics Tools (e.g., Tableau, Oracle Visual Analytics, Power BI, Spotfire) Aptitude for statistics, data collection, querying, graphical reporting familiarity with report production Strong working knowledge of Microsoft Word, Excel and Power and SharePoint products (advanced SharePoint Site Management experience is a plus) Demonstrated ability to interpret and fulfill requirements by partnering with business and technology leads in providing high performing, scalable and maintainable solutions. Communication Skills Ability to aggregate, condense and transform both business and technical data into easily understandable concepts for business partners and leadership. Strong written and oral communication skills, including developing executive level presentation materials and regulatory related materials Experience in reviewing diverse data and writing analyses and commentary with the ability to differentiate between "need to know and "nice to know Keen eye for design and understanding of layout flows and infographics to ensure effective distribution of information to broad audiences Ability to communicate with various levels of technical and non-technical stakeholders and explain complex concepts in simple terms. Strong interpersonal skills to build and maintain effective working relationships with Compliance Business Partners and External Partners Team player and ability to work collaboratively. Please contact Meera Makam at 925 627 4935 or email mmakamascentsg.com for any questions Qualifications Minimum Experience 3 - 5 years prior relevant experience in the Financial Services, Legal, ComplianceRiskAudit Management andor Management Strategy Consulting industries 2 - 3 years practical hands on SASSQL Experience (SAS Experience Preferred) with appropriate certifications 2 - 3 years of Visual Analytics (Tableau, PowerBI, Spotfire, etc.) Preferred Experience 5 - 7 years prior relevant experience in the Financial Services, Legal, ComplianceRisk Management industries with at least 3 to 5 years of top tier Management Consulting Experience 3 - 5 years practical hands on SASSQL Experience (SAS Experience Preferred) with appropriate certifications 3 - 5 years of Visual Analytics (Tableau, PowerBI, Spotfire, etc.) or Data Scientist Certification Proven track record of delivering medium to large programs andor initiatives that deliver significant benefits to their employer andor customers. Minimum Education Bachelor's degree in Information Technology, Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics or related field or equivalent combination of education and experience Preferred Education Masters Advanced Degree in in Information Technology, Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics or related field or equivalent combination of education and experience andor MBA Professional Certifications in SASSQLTableauPowerBI Considered a Plus Professional Skills Strong understanding of the financial services industry (including retail and non-retail banking) with strong knowledge of Governance, Compliance and Risk Management Concepts. Outstanding problem solving and decision making skills to rapidly assess complex situations and provide leadership with options on how to address the situation Strong planning and time management skills with a keen attention for detail Project Management PMP Certification is a plus An ability to adjust to a rapidly changing environment and prioritize deliverables,Job Description-

Brief description of your team function:

The core charter of Credit data services is to build best-in-class data solutions to help bring value to the Credit business. We are looking for an individual who is eager to explore new data, while at the same time is proficient enough in existing data to support business stakeholders looking to leverage it in their last-mile solutions.

The role will involve understanding business requirements, conducting hand-on business systems analysis and translating requirements into technical specifications to produce scalable and consistent solutions.

The role will be responsible for supporting global stakeholder departments, working domain leads and data citizens across different GEO's such as Americas, EMEA, and Asia Pacific. This position requires interaction with geographically disbursed business and technical teams requiring the candidate be a self-starter with strong written/verbal communication skills, leadership qualities and project/task management skills.

Breakdown of Day to Day tasks

· 30% Meeting business stakeholders to gather/discuss business requirements

· 20% Business systems and data analysis

· 20% Documenting/Building technical specification

· 30% Working with engineering team development satisfies business functional requirements

Top 3 hard skills, stack ranked
Business systems analysis, data analysis (Teradata, Oracle, Hadoop), problem-solving
Data modeling & data solutions architecture
Communication skills
What is going to make someone stand out as the best
Bachelor's degree in computer science or engineering discipline with a strong quantitative aptitude
Ability to work with business leads, business stakeholders, subject matter experts and technical staff to gather and develop business needs in the form of technical requirements
Identifying and refining current and futurestate business processes by performing deep dive analysis of current state and propose future state solutions effectively using clear and precise documentation
Motivation to understand business processes and data platforms in order to design/deliver scalable data solutions to support customer needs
Good understanding of database principles and advanced SQL in order to perform complex analysis
Expert understanding of data modelling concepts, experience with data modelling and generating metadata to support relational & non-relational database implementations; experience building logical and physical data models.
Good understanding of distributed systems (Teradata, Hadoop), data movement and optimizing ETL processing of extremely large datasets with specified SLAs.
Collaborate closely with engineering team and provide ongoing support to help implement end user requirements
Ensure the consistency and quality of data solutions completed by engineering team.
Prior knowledge of any analytical visualization tools like Tableau, MSTR is desirable
Document data solutions for easy business consumption.
Strong communication skills, both written and verbal, and skilled at adjusting communication style/vocabulary to an audience's role/function and technical familiarity
How will you determine if the individual is performing well?
Documentation of requirements/needs gathered from business teams
Communications/updates to management and project team members
Functional specs and other documentation given as requirements to engineering teams
Ability to identify and communicate effort, risks and dependencies to project team members/stakeholders
Relationships with business users and technical teams
Delivery of high quality solutions meeting business requirements,Scientific Business Analyst (PreClinical Data)
South San Francisco, CA
Initial 6-month contact

Career opportunity for the right person:
You will never need to work over-time hours- it is important to the group that everyone has a good work/life balance.
This role has a strong possibility to extend and even eventually convert but you will need to prove you are able to keep up with the fast pace all while working collaboratively.
Many of the veteran Rock Stars in this department started as a contractor.
This department is desperate for help and is always growing talent from within.
Seeking:
Ideal candidate would have a scientific background with a history of working in a preclinical, Biopharma laboratory or similar. Someone who has, more recently, moved into a Business Analyst role. This person would need to have some informatics experience, but we are NOT looking for someone with a heavily technical background at all.

Summary:
Our client is looking for an experienced and talented scientific business analyst to document current and future-state data flows for a wide variety of preclinical safety data. This effort supports the creation of an integrated informatics strategy for the Safety Assessment group.

Main responsibilities you will need to know how to do right off:
Work with the Scientists to gather requirements/information within their business processes, to better understand what the gaps may be and how it relates to the informatics landscape:
Create documentation around the requirements
Create documentation around the process gaps and solution gaps
Create data flows
Make recommendation of what the future strategy might look like
Synthesize the business requirements across different informatics efforts supporting various group within Safety Assessment
Skills:
Minimum: Bachelor's degree in Life Science, Computer Science, or a related field
4 - 6+ years of experience in a biopharmaceutical field
Experience with preclinical safety data (toxicology, pathology, invivo, invitro, imaging etc.)
Basic knowledge of informatics
Experience creating business and data flows using Visio or similar diagramming software
Experience with digital imaging and/or digital pathology strongly preferred
Soft skills as a MUST:
Excellent oral and written communication skills
Enjoys working collaboratively
Are you the right candidate?
Have you ever worked in a preclinical lab?
Are you a Business Analyst with a scientific background?
Do you have SOME Informatics experience (such as data storage solutions and solutions around analytics, dashboarding etc.)?
Do you have a basic understanding of HOW the lifecycle of the data works within a preclinical lab?
Would you be able to speak to Scientists in their language and be able to ask them questions about their processes in order for you to be able to make recommendations about how the team could potentially transfer that into the informatics space?
Would you be knowledgeable and comfortable asking the Scientist questions surrounding their detailed processes?
Can you see yourself being capable of asking these types of questions directly to the scientist? : how are you collecting the various RNA seq data? How are you going to process it? where will you store it? How will you look for the output? How are you going to use differentials?
IF SO, PLEASE APPLY AND SEND AN EMAIL TO bgalley@ascentsg.com for immediate consideration!

Company Description:

About Ascent:

Ascent is a leading national technology consulting and professional services firm that focuses on tactical and strategic consulting. Ascents fundamental business is providing staffing services to Large Enterprise clients in our core market verticals: Financial Services, Healthcare, and Life Sciences. We focus the majority of our efforts in Staff Augmentation support of Large Enterprise Clients who utilize a Vendor Management System. Ascent works as both a reliable supplier in support of programs, as well as a Strategic Advisor in support of enterprise efforts to establish best in class preferred vendor programs. Ascent was ranked in the 2007 and 2008 Inc. 500 and recognized specifically for its innovative work in staff augmentation support of Large Enterprise preferred vendor accounts.

If you are ready to propel your career to new heights read on. We are looking for talented and dedicated colleagues to join our phenomenal team. At Ascent, we have created an environment where culture, commitment and opportunity converge to yield a truly unique place to work. We know that every employee has something important to say and that every employee is integral to our success. Where else can you walk over to a founder and talk about your ideas to help build our business and have that idea implemented in 48 hours? More importantly, we do everything we can to make sure our employees not only have great jobs, but great lives.,Our client is a global leader in software services for the architecture, engineering, media, education, and entertainment industries. They have an immediate need for an experienced Business Process Analyst to assist with the implementation of a new privacy tool. This role will be remote to start and will ultimately be based in the San Rafael location. Responsibilities will include Map and maintain current and future state processes, data flowsdata inventory Drive end-to-end process design and analysis while collaborating with cross-functional teams Make recommendations for process improvements to drive change Help identify, measure, and report on key performance metrics that demonstrate the health and effectiveness of the Privacy program Assist with implementation of privacy tech tools to improve privacy maturity and build scalable processes Serve as the liaison between the business stakeholders and technical teams Understand business problems and translate them into functional and non-functional requirements Dissect high-level information into details and communicate these details in a manner understood by relevant audiences. Qualifications Strong business analysis and process mapping skills Experience collaborating with technical and business teams Process analysis, process documentation, and requirements gathering Experience with common BPM, Project Mgmt tools Experience with Privacy Tools such as OneTrust, TrustArc, Securiti AI, etc.is helpful Certifications CIPPUSECIPM or CIPT or other privacy or risk and compliance-related certifications is a plus, but not required Working knowledge of SQL, databases, and BI tools For immediate consideration, please email your resume in Word format, along with the best time and number to contact you.,Job Description
The purpose of this position is to minimize morbidity and mortality associated with COVID-19 among Indiana residents by conducting a broad and complex range of informatics and analytical activities as part of the NBS/Surveillance team. The scope of this position includes, but is not limited to: surveillance of COVID-19, assistance in surveillance, response and guidance to other program areas outside of the ERC.

Responsibilities
Manage and analyze infectious disease data collected through routine surveillance, public health investigations, and applied epidemiologic studies;
Manage and analyze data collected through routine for other divisions as necessary;
Provide consultation and technical assistance to epidemiologists, local health departments, and the general public with respect to infectious diseases or other assigned projects;
Work directly with programmer and developer staff on making system improvements;
Assist epidemiologist in conducting data analysis;
Assist in the development of program logic models and quality improvement projects
Prepare and disseminate written and oral reports and presentations that communicate necessary information to internal and external partners;
Participate in writing grants and other funding proposals;
Serve as a backup to other data analysts;
Perform related duties as assigned.
Qualifications

Education:
A master’s degree in a relevant field (e.g., public health, biological sciences, statistics, etc.) and ≥ 2 years’ relevant experience, OR
A doctoral-level degree in epidemiology or other relevant field, OR
A graduate or professional degree in a health-related field (e.g., RN, MD/DO, DDS/DMD, DVM, PhD, RS) with specific epidemiology training (e.g., MPH degree, CDC Epidemic Intelligence Service, or CSTE Applied Epidemiology Fellowship), OR
A bachelor’s degree in a relevant field and ≥ 4 years of relevant public health experience.
Knowledge, skills, and abilities:
Expertise in software or languages use to manipulate and analyze data, including SQL and either Python or R
Experience analyzing datasets and querying databases
Cursory experience with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
Strong understanding of machine learning concepts and tools
Knowledge of state laws and regulations as well as federal public health guidance documents pertaining to infectious diseases
Skill in identification of public health problems pertinent to Indiana residents
Skill in managing large complex datasets, data cleaning, and conducting common and descriptive and statistical analyses
Demonstrated attention to detail and organization
Able to communicate effectively with a variety of team members including epidemiologists, public health staff, developers/programmers, and other project personnel.

Company Description
Alpha Rae Personnel is a full-service Universal Staffing and Executive Search firm with a proven track record of success. We have over 30 years of experience placing candidates for many different kinds of positions with a wide variety of companies locally, regionally, and all over the United States. Please contact our office to discuss how we can assist "YOU" in your employment search.,Job Description
Title: Business Data Analyst
Location: Indianapolis, IN
Job Type: Contract
Duration: 6 months

C2C AND REMOTE OPTION NOT AVAILABLE

Job Description
The Product & Pricing Operations team forms the nexus where Product Innovation, Customer Success, and Operational Excellence meet. We are in need of an experienced Business Analyst to help us manage our business processes, analyze and validate data, upkeep our documentation, and work with our business partners to develop and document business requirements for process improvement and system updates. The Senior Analyst/Analyst, Product & Pricing Operations will additionally assist in refreshing data for dashboards and analytics, along with executing data validation scripts and communicating any deficiencies.
The ideal candidate will have a thorough understanding of Business Process Analysis and a strong understanding of using well-managed data as a source of truth. The role requires a meticulous attention to detail and the ability to execute on deadlines with accuracy and consistency. To be successful, this individual will be a highly-motivated self-starter that can jump in and get things done.

Responsibilities
Work across a spectrum of stakeholders to execute data and documentation updates on strict deadlines
Manage a documentation repository and team landing page, including basic configuration changes and documentation upkeep
Work with peers and business partners to identify and document business requirements
Translate business needs/requirements into tangible actions
Import/export data from business applications with a moderate amount of data transformation
Manage dashboards and reports, including source data refreshes and generating new/updated reports
Execute data validation/audit scripts and understand/communicate results to data owners
Required Skills/Experience
Bachelor’s degree or equivalent experience in a relevant field
3+ years experience in Business/Data Analysis roles
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Ability to effectively communicate concepts to both technical and non-technical stakeholders
Superb organizational skills
Uncompromising attention to detail
Solid understanding of Process Documentation, Requirements Gathering, Change Management, and Business Approvals
Experience owning a Business Process end-to-end, including Intake, Change Management, Execution, and Output
Advanced-level Excel knowledge (more than just VLOOKUP)
Intermediate data experience, including ETL, reporting, validating/auditing, and using tools to analyze data
Ability to thrive in a fast-paced/fast-growing environment where deadlines are imperative
Experience using Sales/Service Cloud in a business setting
Self-starter, highly-motivated, ability to jump in and get things done with minimal supervision
Desired Skills/Experience
Ability to write intermediate SQL queries/scripts
Familiarity with the Google G Suite (Docs, Sheets, Slides, etc.)
Experience with corporate compliance (Sarbanes Oxley, ISO 27001, etc.)
Power-user or Admin level experience with Salesforce.com platform, including knowledge of Einstein Analytics
Familiarity with an out-of-the-box website creation tool (such as Google Sites),Job Description
The Data Analyst plays an integral role in decision-making for our clients' Compliance Solutions. This individual is responsible for providing strategic recommendations grounded in data analysis and statistical models. A commitment to continuous improvement is critical as it will ensure the continued success of our data analytics initiatives which drive increased revenue and customer retention.

•Data Model Management – Set up experimental designs to answer business questions and opportunities. Determine and execute data refresh cadence in alignment with organizational strategies. Continuously measure model effectiveness and performance against business KPIs. Regularly conduct data validations to ensure models remain relevant.
•Predictive analytics - Test business hypotheses across various departments to construct predictive models. Work in cross functional team to identify new hypotheses. Test sensitivity/impact of current and proposed business initiatives on various customer segments.
•Reporting/Analysis – Develop and publish reporting and analytics as a result of tested hypotheses and provide user-friendly outputs for various departments (e.g., Sales, Marketing, and Executive leadership). Design reporting to provide insight into customer segments, campaign effectiveness, business initiatives, and the relationships.
•Business Management – Participate in various business improvement activities and deep-dive initiatives adding insight where predictive analytics are required to forecast impact/results. Develop partnership with Information Systems to gain insight into upcoming data changes or new data availability.
•Data Quality - Execute different data analytics (joins, audits, correlation, etc.) to ensure the completeness, quality, and consistency of data used for analytics across systems. Works across departments to understand inputs and ensure reliability while providing feedback/recommendations to improve quality.
•Performs other related duties as required or requested.

•Bachelor's Degree in a quantitative field such as statistics, mathematics, information systems, computer science, or economics with two to four years of experience. Master’s Degree in an analytics related field such as statistics is a plus.
•Two or more years of work experience utilizing statistical applications such as: R, SAS, and SPSS.
•Have strong statistical, mathematical, predictive modeling, or machine learning skills.
•Two or more years of experience in working with large datasets, and relational databases (SQL)
•Must be comfortable working with senior management as the analytics and insights provided by this individual are shared throughout various levels of the organization.
•Demonstrating advanced use of Microsoft Excel and working knowledge of CRM systems (Salesforce.com preferred) is a requirement.
•Ability to articulate and present complex data in a user friendly format is critical to the success of this role.
•Must have the ability to work collaboratively in a team environment.
•Must be subject matter expert with a passion for digging into any dataset by researching the relevant in-formation on the subject in order to use the data effectively.
Company Description
Swoon connects with job candidates one-on-one to learn exactly who they are and understand which of our Fortune 1000 clients would have their dream jobs. We form relationships, not just connections, and we pride ourselves on our contractor care initiatives.

Our accomplishments continue to increase each year, and we have received some of the highest honors in the industry. We were named a “Best Staffing Firm to Temp For” by Staffing Industry Analysts in 2019, 2018, 2017, 2015 and 2014.,Job Description
Primary Skills: SQL, Data Pulling, Tableau/QuickSight/MicroStrategy, Data Visualization
Duration: 6+ Months
Contract Type: W2 Only

Required Skills:
Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Mathematics, Information Systems or related field; or equivalent experience.
5+ years' experience as a Data / Business Analyst pulling, analyzing, and delivering analyses
Advanced SQL querying
Advanced expertise in Excel
Experience with data visualization tools such as Tableau, QuickSight, MicroStrategy
Strong verbal/written communication & data presentation skills, including an ability to effectively develop and communicate clear, thoughtful, and comprehensive analyses.
Preferred Skills:
SQL Knowledge
Python Skills
MS Access
Web Macros
Technical Skills
Financial, Tax, or Accounting Background.
To follow up with any questions, please contact Ajitabh @ 408-907-2956

Akraya is an award-winning IT staffing firm and the staffing partner of choice for many leading companies across the US. We offer comprehensive benefits including Health Insurance (medical, dental, and vision), Cafeteria Plan (HSA, FSA, and dependent care), 401(k) (enrollment subject to eligibility), and Sick Pay (varies based on city and state laws).

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit at one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit at one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,Job Description

The Business Analyst will proactively prepare and develop talent and engagement program insights and presentations to support the overall mission of the team. You will work in partnership with team Leadership, Client and Research Lead Recruiters, as well as our central Data and Analytics Teams, to gather and design reporting requirements, and deliver solutions that accurately communicate the Principal Engineer hiring story.

REQUIRED SKILLS
Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, Mathematics, Information Systems or related field; or equivalent experience.
5+ years' experience as a Data / Business Analyst pulling, analyzing, and delivering analyses
Advanced SQL querying
Advanced expertise in Excel
Experience with data visualization tools such as Tableau, QuickSight, MicroStrategy
Strong verbal/written communication & data presentation skills, including an ability to effectively develop and communicate clear, thoughtful, and comprehensive analyses.

PREFERRED SKILLS
SQL Knowledge
Python Skills
MS Access
Web Macros
Technical Skills
Financial, Tax, or Accounting Background,Data Analyst - Renton, WA 12 Months Contract with Benefits Summary The Data Analyst will be proficient in identifying and interpreting trends and patterns in complex and large data sets. The analyst will need to convey these findings to both technical and non-technical stakeholders in written, report, and verbal forms. The capability to apply advanced analysis using statistical techniques, out-of-the-box machine learning procedures, and other domain-specific methodologies is desirable. Data Analyst Requirements Bachelor's degree from an accredited university or college in computer science or equivalent work experience. Work experience as a data analyst or in related field. Ability to work with stakeholders to assess potential risks. Ability to analyze existing tools and databases and provide software solution recommendations. Ability to translate business requirements into non-technical, lay terms. High-level experience in methodologies and processes for managing large scale databases. Demonstrated experience in handling large data sets and relational databases. Understanding of addressing and metadata standards. High-level written and verbal communication skills. Technical Skills SQL ETL Microsoft Reporting Tools (Power BI) ERP - Oracle Workday Lawson Responsibilities Develop and execute SQL queries, extract data in support of analyses, and performs reporting tasks from information systems. Demonstrate skill developing qualitative and quantitative measurement, summarizing results of data file and the follow-up tasks on the data structure to solve related problems and inconsistencies such as missing data or incorrect data values. Demonstrate positive interpersonal skills by effectively collaborating with other team members to identify and resolve problems. Develop and maintain dashboards with most up to date data extracts. Integrate datasets retrieved from multiple data sources and identify opportunities for automation in data extraction. Assist internal customers with data input, reporting, graphing and analysis. Support the design, creation, and deployment of data solutions. Extended Job Details Managing master data, including creation, updates, and deletion. Managing users and user roles. Provide quality assurance of imported data, working with quality assurance analyst if necessary. Commissioning and decommissioning of data sets. Processing confidential data and information according to guidelines. Helping develop reports and analysis. Managing and designing the reporting environment, including data sources, security, and metadata. Supporting the data warehouse in identifying and revising reporting requirements. Supporting initiatives for data integrity and normalization. Generating reports from single or multiple systems. Troubleshooting the reporting database environment and reports. Evaluating changes and updates to source production systems. Providing technical expertise on data storage structures, data mining, and data cleansing. If you are interested in this role, then please feel free to reach out directly to vidhi.kundaliakellyit.com or 720-201-3798 Why Kelly Registered ? By partnering with KellyRegistered IT, you'll have direct connections to top companies around the globe-giving you the chance to put your tech skills to work on some of today's most intriguing, innovative, and high-visibility projects. In a world where change is the only constant, our unparalleled connections and IT market expertise help you take your skills exactly where you want to go. We're here to help you gain experience, keep learning, and move your career forward. About Kelly Registered At Kelly, we're always thinking about what's next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, we're a leading advocate for temporarynontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world. Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.,Job Description
Position Title: Engines Configuration and Data Management Analyst

Position Description: Protingent Staffing has an exciting contract opportunity with our client in Kent, WA.

Job Qualifications:
AA/AS or BA/BS in a related technical or liberal arts discipline
3+ years of direct product configuration management experience (Product structure, parts, drawings, documents and requirements management)
2+ years of experience working in a highly regulated environment (aerospace, nuclear, government, medical device, etc.)
Experience working with software related to configuration management of complex product
Working knowledge of configuration management principles and practices
Familiar with product lifecycle management (PLM) and/or data management tools
Possess high attention to detail and strong organizational/coordination skills
Proficient in Microsoft Office applications (Word, Excel, PowerPoint).
Experience in aerospace industry
Proficient in technical writing of process and procedure
Experience using Windchill, Creo, DOORS, Confluence, and Jira
Familiarity with Export Control regulations (EAR/ITAR)
About Protingent: Protingent is a niche provider of top Engineering and IT talent to Software, Electronics, Medical Device, Telecom and Aerospace companies nationwide. Protingent exists to make a positive impact and contribution to the lives of others as well as our community by providing relevant, rewarding and exciting work opportunities for our candidates.

Benefits Package: Protingent offers competitive salary, 100% paid health insurance, education/certification reimbursement, pre-tax commuter benefits, Paid Time Off (PTO) and an administered 401k plan.,Required Skills:

Java, SQL
Experience with developing
and productionizing data processing pipeline using tools like Apache Beam, Spark and/or Flink
Data visualization and dashboard creation
Experience with statistical modeling approaches.
Experience implementing software to make data accessible through simple Web and APIs.
Preferred skills:

Experience with query development and data management tools like PLX.
Experience with creating effective data visualizations using tools like Google Data Studio and Tableau
Experience using Flume Java
Tech


The job role would require knowledge/ability to learn the following technologies:
Frontend: Angular Dart
Backend : Java
Tools : Plx, Google Data Studio
Call Delivery
Audio Quality
System Latency
Resource Utilization efficiency
Correlate system performance Vs Performance Trend Analysis.,Title : Data Analyst/Developer
Location : Redmond, WA
To be responsible for managing technology in projects and providing technical guidance / solutions for work completion .
To develop and guide the team members in enhancing their technical capabilities and increasing productivity.
To ensure process compliance in the assigned module| and participate in technical discussions/review. To be responsible for providing technical guidance / solutions
To prepare and submit status reports for minimizing exposure and risks on the project or closure of escalations.
Required Skills :
7-8 years of relevant work experience as a Data Analyst/Dev and driving business insights.
Strong experience in business requirements analysis and associated metrics and data requests.
Experience in the design, development, and testing using SQL, T-SQL
Experience in data profiling & quick understanding of new data sources.
Experience on Data engineering activities to pull data from multiple source systems and Integration of various data sources.
Good experience in creating workflows and pipelines for data processing.
Strong SQL Query experience with large data sets from multiple sources.
Experience on creating data streams in Cosmos and Data Sets in SQL Server.
Strong experience on creating Scope script to push & pull Cosmos data.
Sqlize the Cosmos streams data through XML
Good experience in creating visualizations using Power BI
Strong debugging capabilities for faster bug fixing.
Knowledge of VSO / GIT would be preferable.
Provide correct and accurate response to queries.
Nice to have knowledge on C# , power shell and .Net skills.,Job Description
Primary Skills: Epic data, HL7, SQL, SSAS, Python
Duration: 6-12 Months + Possible Extension/Conversion Based on Performance*
Contract Type: W2 Only

Job Description:
Looking for Sr. Data Analyst for the startup company based out of Seattle and was built by doctors and data scientists to help providers and payers intervene earlier, at lower costs. Client's risk prediction platform helps uncover clinical, operational and financial risks by aggregating data from existing sources such as EMR, ADT, Claims and Financial data. They work extensively with hospitals, also have some sort of partnership with Microsoft.
Requirement:
The HM is looking to hire someone who has:
Deep understanding of healthcare data along with experience working with large data sets (SQL, SSAS, Python).
Someone with epic data and HL7 data knowledge within healthcare would be great.
To follow up with any questions, please contact Sagar @ 408-907-7680

Akraya is an award-winning IT staffing firm and the staffing partner of choice for many leading companies across the US. We offer comprehensive benefits including Health Insurance (medical, dental, and vision), Cafeteria Plan (HSA, FSA, and dependent care), 401(k) (enrollment subject to eligibility), and Sick Pay (varies based on city and state laws).

If this position is not quite what you're looking for, visit akraya.com, and submit a copy of your resume. We will get to work finding you a job that is a better fit for one of our many amazing clients.

Akraya is committed to equal treatment and opportunity in all aspects of recruitment, selection, and employment without regard to gender, race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, gender identity/expression, sexual orientation, veteran or military status, or any other category protected under the law. Akraya is an equal opportunity employer; committed to a community of inclusion, and an environment free from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.,Job Description
Exciting space exploration engineering company in Puget Sound is seeking to hire an experienced Configuration/Data Management Analyst. You will participate in the development and implementation of configuration management systems for spaceflight systems. We are seeking an experienced individual with excellent oral, written, interpersonal, and analytics skills who can thrive in a fast-paced environment. You will be primarily responsible for the team that implements and executes the configuration and data management systems used by business unit. You will ensure the implementation is consistent with company policies. In this hands-on position, you'll work to increase the speed and efficiency of the program by supporting the timely delivery, quality, and transparency of data to support program activity and business systems. The right personality will be a proactive, service-oriented individual with excellent oral, written and interpersonal skills who thrives in a fast-paced environment.

Location: Kent, WA

Duration: 6-18+ months, long term opportunity

Pay: DOE

RESPONSIBILITIES:
Execute the spaceflight documentation and configuration management strategy.
Manage the Business Unit data consistent with the company policies. Implement / improve systems as required to enable our teams to move quickly while meeting requirements.
Train users on the proper use of configuration management tools and systems.
Ensure configuration management requirements are met and are compliant with all applicable regulatory requirements and standards.
Establish new processes and implement effective change management as required, communicating cross-business as necessary.
Establish product and processes metrics that effectively measure and improve performance of documentation and configuration management processes as required.
QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
AA/AS or BA/BS in a related technical or liberal arts discipline
5-7 years of direct product configuration management experience (Product structure, parts, drawings and requirements management experience highly desired).
3+ years of experience working in a highly regulated environment (security systems, medical device, aerospace, etc.).
Deep experience with world-class toolsets for configuration management in complex products
Proven ability to communicate effectively both in writing and verbally with staff at all levels of the organization and external stakeholders, including regulatory agencies, customers and suppliers.
Excellent technical writing and presentation skills.
Proficient with configuration management principles and practices
Proficient with product lifecycle management (PLM) and/or data management tools
Proficient in Microsoft Office applications (Word, Excel, PowerPoint)
Familiarity with export control (EAR/ITAR) regulations
Must be a U.S. citizen or permanent resident (current Green Card holder), or lawfully admitted into the U.S. as a refugee or granted asylum.
DESIRED:
CMII certification/training
Experience in aerospace or aviation
Experience with Windchill, Creo, ERP/MES systems
Experience with DOORS Next Generation
Experience with Confluence & JIRA
Database skills with SQL, queries, etc

Company Description
We've been one of Washington's Top 100 Best Workplaces in Washington for five consecutive years. We’re in the business of building great teams that meet individual needs and help grow thriving companies to reach their goals. That means we understand more than most that your people are your culture. We strategically create industry-specific teams that foster a close-knit start-up feel within our own company. This ensures we have a deep knowledge of every sector we serve while allowing us to build unique teams that work (and play) well together. We’re honored to be recognized as one of Washington’s Top 100 Best Places to Work for five years running, and have applied those same strategies to find the absolute best matches for our clients and candidates to grow happily and successfully.,What are they doing: Building a UI out that district managers can interact with and potentially store managers. They are moving the store data exchange from an old legacy system that is IBM and integrating with other systems. Data is currently coming from multiple places and they are working to consolidate it and have more effective data.

Reason:Currently stores are opening/closing without a lot of notice due to COVID or might only have a drive thru open. This data exchange is going to benefit customers real time updates on store addresses, phone numbers, and open/closed status.

SOFT SKILLS:
Strong influencing skills
Great communication
Ability to work independently from the immediate team to be able to gather requirements
Must be able to handle ambiguity. This is a moving piece with changes coming often
Top 3:
Experience with master data management systems: if they have built a new one bigger bonus
Know their way around querying a database
Dealing with Ambiguity-change directions quickly in this project
Details about work: Define the new terminology and get everyone to agree on this. Pulling together data that has been around for 20 years. Has needs to be cleaned up. Open to non-local candidates. Have a preference towards local.
Retail experience not required. Not necessary for this role. Easy data to get your head around. Common knowledge of design, doesn't have to be an expert.
Need to ask questions of business partners on what they are doing with some of that data.
60-90 day roadmap.ramping them up: sit down with all key players to understand it from everyone's angle. Walk them through the structure. PM is very organized running KanBan board showing everyone what their assignment is. Walk through it a few times a wek with the team. Keeps track of upcoming interviews in discovery mode. Visibility calendar of what is coming up and how it is assigned out. Structured platform,Active Directory Data Migration Analyst - Seattle, WA 6 - 12 Months Contract We are looking to hire a Data Analyst to join our AD Migration team. You will take responsibility for managing our master data set, developing reports, and troubleshooting data issues. To do well in this role you need a very fine eye for detail, experience as a data analyst, and deep understanding of the popular data analysis tools and databases. Responsibilities Managing master data, including creation, updates, and deletion. Managing users and user roles. Provide quality assurance of imported data, working with quality assurance analyst if necessary. Commissioning and decommissioning of data sets. Processing confidential data and information according to guidelines. Helping develop reports and analysis. Managing and designing the reporting environment, including data sources, security, and metadata. Supporting the data warehouse in identifying and revising reporting requirements. Supporting initiatives for data integrity and normalization. Assessing tests and implementing new or upgraded software and assisting with strategic decisions on new systems. Generating reports from single or multiple systems. Troubleshooting the reporting database environment and reports. Evaluating changes and updates to source production systems. Providing technical expertise on data storage structures, data mining, and data cleansing. Requirements Bachelor's degree from an accredited university or college in computer science. Work experience as a data analyst or in related field. Experience working with Exchange and Active Directory. Knowledge of MySQL databases. Experience developing scripts, debugging and deploying software preferred. Knowledge of email, networking topology, LDAP, SMTP, TCPIP protocol Strong understanding of architecting and configuring Microsoft Windows OS technology (client and server) including AD Federation, Forests, Domains, Trusts, DNS, DHCP, Group Policy and Organizational Units. Creation of Azure AD cloud solution. Knowledge of file and print server management and troubleshooting. Strong knowledge of domain controller configuration and migration. Experience with designing and deploying group policies. Strong problem solving and leadership skills. Self-starter and self-motivated a must. Experience with Exchange on-prem and cloud configuration and deployment a plus. Ability to work with stakeholders to assess potential risks. Ability to analyze existing tools and databases and provide software solution recommendations. Ability to translate business requirements into non-technical, lay terms. High-level experience in methodologies and processes for managing large scale databases. High-level written and verbal communication skills. If you or anyone you know is interested in this role, then please feel free to reach out directly to Vidhi Kundalia at 720-201-3798 or vidhi.kundaliakellyit.com Why Kelly Registered ? By partnering with KellyRegistered IT, you'll have direct connections to top companies around the globe-giving you the chance to put your tech skills to work on some of today's most intriguing, innovative, and high-visibility projects. In a world where change is the only constant, our unparalleled connections and IT market expertise help you take your skills exactly where you want to go. We're here to help you gain experience, keep learning, and move your career forward. About Kelly Registered At Kelly, we're always thinking about what's next and advising job seekers on new ways of working to reach their full potential. In fact, we're a leading advocate for temporarynontraditional workstyles, because we believe they allow flexibility and tremendous growth opportunities that enable a better way to work and live. Connecting great people with great companies is what we do best, and our employment opportunities span a wide variety of workstyles, skill levels, and industries around the world. Kelly is an equal opportunity employer committed to employing a diverse workforce, including, but not limited to, minorities, females, individuals with disabilities, protected veterans, sexual orientation, gender identity. Equal Employment Opportunity is The Law.,Job Qualifications:BA/BS in a related technical or liberal arts discipline
2+ years of direct product configuration management experience (Product structure, parts, drawings and requirements management experience highly desired).
Experience working in a highly regulated environment (security systems, medical device, aerospace, etc.).
Experience in toolsets for configuration management in complex products
Experience in configuration management principles and practices
Experience with configuration and product data management tools, preferably Windchill
Proficient in Microsoft Office applications (Word, Excel, PowerPoint)
Familiarity with export control (EAR/ITAR) regulations

Responsibilities:

Support the development and advancement of configuration management systems specific to HLS
Train users on the proper use of configuration management tools and systems
Ensure configuration management requirements are met and are compliant with all applicable regulatory requirements and standards
Support the configuration control and delivery of contract deliverable data items as defined in the Data Procurement Document (DPD)
Maintain the information and data management systems used by the program
Provide product and processes metrics that effectively measure and improve performance of documentation and configuration management processes as required.,Job Description
Position Title: Configuration/Data Management Analyst III

Position Description: Protingent has an opportunity for a Configuration Analyst in Kent, WA.

Job Qualifications:
AA/AS or BA/BS in a related technical or liberal arts discipline
5-7 years of direct product configuration management experience (Product structure, parts, drawings and requirements management experience highly desired).
3+ years of experience working in a highly regulated environment (security systems, medical device, aerospace, etc.).
Deep experience with world-class toolsets for configuration management in complex products
Proven ability to communicate effectively both in writing and verbally with staff at all levels of the organization and external stakeholders, including regulatory agencies, customers and suppliers.
Excellent technical writing and presentation skills.
Proficient with configuration management principles and practices
Proficient with product lifecycle management (PLM) and/or data management tools
Proficient in Microsoft Office applications (Word, Excel, PowerPoint)
Familiarity with export control (EAR/ITAR) regulations
CMII certification/training
Experience in aerospace or aviation
Experience with Windchill, Creo, ERP/MES systems
Experience with DOORS Next Generation
Experience with Confluence & JIRA
Database skills with SQL, queries, etc
About Protingent: Protingent is a niche provider of top Engineering and IT talent to Software, Electronics, Medical Device, Telecom and Aerospace companies nationwide. Protingent exists to make a positive impact and contribution to the lives of others as well as our community by providing relevant, rewarding and exciting work opportunities for our candidates.

Benefits Package: Protingent offers competitive salary, 100% paid health insurance, education/certification reimbursement, pre-tax commuter benefits, Paid Time Off (PTO) and an administered 401k plan.,LONG TERM ASSIGNMENT WITH OPPORTUNITY TO BE EXTENDED OR GO PERMANENT BASED ON PERFORMANCE
DUE TO COVID-19 CANDIDATE WILL WORK FROM HOME UNTIL Client OFFICES ARE RE-OPENED. CANDIDATE WILL BE REQUIRED TO BE ONSITE DAILY ONCE FACILITIES RE-OPEN.
Monday-Friday; 8am-5pm

Interview schedule: Initial 1 hour video interview. Selected candidates will then be scheduled for a panel interview.

The Data Analyst work assignments are varied and frequently require interpretation and independent determination of the appropriate courses of action. The Data Analyst will leverage operational and strategic decision making thru assorted reporting tasks, data interpretation, education, and consultation/collaboration with partners across the enterprise. The candidate should be able to build analysis and tools from multiple data sources that end users can easily learn and maintain.

Responsibilities:
Data collection and manipulation from numerous sources (Oracle, SQL, Excel, etc.) with an understanding of database structure design
Analyze data to solve a wide variety of business problems and creation of data visualizations that drive strategic vison
Passion for contributing to a cross-functional team focused on continuously improving member experiences and clinical outcomes though data analysis and interpretation
Ensure data quality, timeliness and accuracy
Process thinking, independent problem solving and working collaboratively with the team

Required Qualifications
Bachelors Degree or equivalent experience
3+ years of technical experience in data reconciliation
Expert level MS Excel and highly efficient in SQL
Proficiency in compiling, analyzing, and interpreting data trends
The ability to communicate effectively across levels and functions
Self-starter comfortable working independently to accomplish components of a larger program
Strong organizational and time management skills
Demonstrated excellence in problem solving/critical thinking,Job Description
LONG TERM ASSIGNMENT WITH OPPORTUNITY TO BE EXTENDED OR GO PERMANENT BASED ON PERFORMANCE

CORRECT LOCATION: CENTENNIAL, CO
6300 S. Syracuse Way, Ste 555
Centennial CO 80111

*DUE TO COVID-19 CANDIDATE WILL WORK FROM HOME UNTIL HUMANA OFFICES ARE RE-OPENED. CANDIDATE WILL BE REQUIRED TO BE ONSITE DAILY ONCE FACILITIES RE-OPEN.
Monday-Friday; 8am-5pm

Interview schedule: Initial 1 hour video interview. Selected candidates will then be scheduled for a panel interview.

The Data Analyst work assignments are varied and frequently require interpretation and independent determination of the appropriate courses of action. The Data Analyst will leverage operational and strategic decision making thru assorted reporting tasks, data interpretation, education, and consultation/collaboration with partners across the enterprise. The candidate should be able to build analysis and tools from multiple data sources that end users can easily learn and maintain.

Responsibilities:
• Data collection and manipulation from numerous sources (Oracle, SQL, Excel, etc.) with an understanding of database structure design
• Analyze data to solve a wide variety of business problems and creation of data visualizations that drive strategic vison
• Passion for contributing to a cross-functional team focused on continuously improving member experiences and clinical outcomes though data analysis and interpretation
• Ensure data quality, timeliness and accuracy
• Process thinking, independent problem solving and working collaboratively with the team

Required Qualifications
• Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent experience
• 3+ years of technical experience in data reconciliation
• Expert level MS Excel and highly efficient in SQL
• Proficiency in compiling, analyzing, and interpreting data trends
• The ability to communicate effectively across levels and functions
• Self-starter – comfortable working independently to accomplish components of a larger program
• Strong organizational and time management skills
• Demonstrated excellence in problem solving/critical thinking
Company Description
The staffing solutions division of GDKN is a leading provider of end-to-end solutions in the temporary staffing space. With companies across the globe laying critical emphasis on their human resources management, demand for temporary staffing is rapidly growing because it improves focus on core/critical activities and can be adapted to the seasonal nature of business, addresses business uncertainties and the demand for rapid growth. In short, temporary staffing creates a very nimble human capital platform which allows organizations to maximize their productivity and flexibility at all times.,My top tier client in Boulder is hiring a Data Analyst on a contract to hire basis ASAP to transfer data visualization into Domo!

Job Title: Data Analyst
Location: Boulder, Colorado
Duration: Contract to hire
Rate: DOE
Start Date: ASAP!!!

Job Description

As the newest member of our revenue operations team, you will be analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data to help us make strategic business decisions. You are a data analyst with a slant towards engineering - some might describe you as a data superhero, and that's what we want. You have in-depth experience with data visualization and a communication style that gives you the ability to deliver your message clearly and concisely to stakeholders. If you've been working in a SaaS, MarTech, or mobile app company and are ready to take on a new challenge, let's talk!

Responsibilities:
Utilizing Gainsight, Salesforce, Google Analytics, Hotjar to collect essential data related to the success of the business
Converting raw data and complex quantitative analysis into actionable business goals
Helping direct insights that will improve efficiencies and identifying opportunities for product optimization
Reviewing and analyzing user session videos to identify patterns and correlate with analytics
Championing our data-driven, user centered design process, championing a metrics driven culture and outcomes
Collaborating with Marketing, Product, Sales, Support, Systems, Data Science, and Engineering to coordinate solutions and bring ideas to life
Requirements:
Domo / RedShift
Salesforce
Quicksite
Nice to Have :
Google App scripts
Javascript
Gainsight & Google Analytics
If qualified and interested please email your most updated resume to Kaylyn at Kaylyn.Gerwig@Mondo.com,Job Description


Job #: 1067357

Apex Systems Inc. in Denver, Colorado is looking for several Technical Data/Business Intelligence Analysts who are interested in taking on a new and exciting job! If you have a desire to learn new processes, systems, and grow with this organization please send us your resume. We're excited to tell you more about these new career opportunities!

Analyst Requirements:
Exceptional analytical and conceptual thinking skills.
A solid understanding of SQL, rational databases, and normalization.
Experience with Tableau
The ability to influence stakeholders and work closely with them to determine acceptable solutions.
Excellent documentation skills.
If you are interested in hearing more, please apply to this posting or reach out to Amber Yatteau, Technical Recruiter, ayatteau@apexsystems.com or at 702-522-6108.

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,RESPONSIBILITIES:

Kforce has a client in search of a Data Analyst in Denver, CO.

Summary:
The candidate will provide data architectural leadership in developing enterprise data/process models, and logical/physical database designs. They will also provide data and database development, maintenance, and production support. The Data Analyst will participate in IT and Business project to define system requirements.

Key Tasks:
Define and measure key performance metrics and KPIs
Collaborate with leadership to define performance goals/targets and quantify performance gaps (incl. time, volume and financially based metrics)
Build data/performance reports and dashboards (as needed); facilitate metrics reporting process
Analyst various types of system data to quantify baseline metrics and identify data trends
Present data findings in such a manner that is meaningful and actionable to management
Manage program budget vs. actual financial reporting
REQUIREMENTS:
Experience Level: 6-10 years
Business analysis
Business process modeling - enterprise to department level
Ability to interpret Entity Relationship Diagrams
Kforce is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, protected veteran status, or disability status.,Job Description
Voca Technology has immediate openings available for Data Analyst professionals in Centennial, CO! If you are interested, please forward your resume to Jamie Brough at jbrough@myvoca.com and call him at 952.777.1834. Thanks!

Assignment Details

Job Description
The Data Analyst work assignments are varied and frequently require interpretation and independent determination of the appropriate courses of action. The Data Analyst will leverage operational and strategic decision making thru assorted reporting tasks, data interpretation, education, and consultation/collaboration with partners across the enterprise. The candidate should be able to build analysis and tools from multiple data sources that end users can easily learn and maintain.
Responsibilities:
Data collection and manipulation from numerous sources (Oracle, SQL, Excel, etc.) with an understanding of database structure design
Analyze data to solve a wide variety of business problems and creation of data visualizations that drive strategic vison
Passion for contributing to a cross-functional team focused on continuously improving member experiences and clinical outcomes though data analysis and interpretation
Ensure data quality, timeliness and accuracy
Process thinking, independent problem solving and working collaboratively with the team
Qualifications:
Required Qualifications
Bachelor’ s Degree or equivalent experience
3+ years of technical experience in data reconciliation
Expert level MS Excel and highly efficient in SQL
Proficiency in compiling, analyzing, and interpreting data trends
The ability to communicate effectively across levels and functions
Self-starter – comfortable working independently to accomplish components of a larger program
Strong organizational and time management skills
Demonstrated excellence in problem solving/critical thinking
Shift:
Monday-Friday; 8am-5pm
Voca: The Spirit of Work

IND-IT,Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users. Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 1 year or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area. Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.

EndPoint Security:

Endpoint Security

Scope: Management of Endpoint Security systems and configurations

Description: Assist with the management and support of state enterprise endpoint security services. Including working with end users to find resolution to endpoint related issues.

Monitor and implement all necessary updates to all endpoint security software

Develops methodology and documents configurations and configuration changes to the anti-virus and endpoint security systems.

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver, US-CO,Gloo, headquartered in beautiful Boulder, Colorado, builds software for people and organizations dedicated to improving lives. We’re leveraging the same exponential tech that’s driving success in other industries and making it available through tools such as big data, personal growth plans, custom assessments, and eventually, an entire market network focused on growth. As one of Boulder’s most successful and innovative tech companies, Gloo needs more talented professionals who are driven to make a positive impact on humanity. Are you one of them?

As the newest member of our revenue operations team, you will be analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data to help us make strategic business decisions. You are a data analyst with a slant towards engineering - some might describe you as a data superhero, and that’s what we want. You have in-depth experience with data visualization and a communication style that gives you the ability to deliver your message clearly and concisely to stakeholders. If you’ve been working in a SaaS or mobile app company with your hands on marketing analytics and are ready to take on a new challenge, let’s talk!

How you’ll spend your days
Utilizing Salesforce, Google Analytics and Hotjar to collect essential data related to the success of the business
Converting raw data and complex quantitative analysis into actionable business goals
Helping direct insights that will improve efficiencies and identifying opportunities for product optimization
Reviewing and analyzing user session videos to identify patterns and correlate with analytics
Championing our data-driven, user centered design process; evangelizing metrics and outcomes
Collaborating with Marketing, Product, Sales, Support, Systems, Data Science, and Engineering to coordinate solutions and bring ideas to life
What you’ll bring to the team
BS in Data Science, Information Management, Computer Science, or a related discipline
At least 4 years of experience analyzing, modeling, and interpreting data in the market intelligence, MarTech or mobile/web platform space
Proficiency with analysis and query languages – SQL, R, Python
Experience with data visualization and BI tools like Tableau and Domo
Ability to identify opportunities for product optimization by tracking user behavior using Google Analytics, Hotjar, and Google Tag Manager
Creative, articulate, and competent communication style – you deliver your message clearly, concisely, and confidently every time
Intellectually curiosity – you are always looking for new ways to extract, analyze, and use data to further our mission
Our team members enjoy
Competitive compensation package and a full suite of benefits
Bonus and ample time off for your personal pursuits
An incredible team of talented and passionate folks to hang out with
Goldstone Partners is helping this experienced team of thought leaders and engineers find an energized individual who wants to be part of something big! Principals only, please. Applications welcome for those who are US Citizens or hold a Green Card.

Job Type: Full-time

Benefits:
Health Insurance
Paid Time Off
Work authorization:
United States (Required)
Schedule:
Monday to Friday
Work Remotely:
Temporarily due to COVID-19,Work Location: Denver, CO 80203

Duration: 06+ Months

Job Description:

Senior Database Programmer for SEEs (Grant Management) Pipeline Implementation

INTRODUCTION

1. The Education is contracting for an on-site, temporary, full-time contractor resource Sr. Database Programmer to analyze, develop, test and implement an enhanced SEEs application. The existing SEEs application is used by the Drop-out Prevention and Student Re-engagement unit to track grants.

2. As part of this project, the new SEEs application will be incorporated into the Online Data Pipeline System (ODS). The Online Data Pipeline System is a standardized system, based on best practices. It is used for CDE data collections from the districts and schools. IMS has been migrating applications to the Online Data Pipeline System since its inception.

CDE IMS has been actively performing business analysis functions to elicit business rules and requirements, as well as technical requirements from the CDE organization(s) currently using the existing SEEs application. The Sr. Database Programmer shall be contracted to:

1. Review and analyze the resulting documentation, subsequently design, develop, test, document, and implement the new application.

2. Incorporating the SEEs application into the data pipeline tool will also include storage of the collected data into the data warehouse. This provides all the best practices for data storage, back-up and recovery, data security, etc.

3. Modernize the existing SEEs application to take advantage of the new features available in CDE’s current Oracle database version, 11g R2 running on the Oracle EXADATA platform. This includes using tables, views and PL/SQL (stored procedures and user defined functions).

4. Java is used to manage web application control logic and to implement the web user interface.

5. Optimize processing and run time.

6. Explore integration of Cognos and/or Tableau BI reporting as part of the resulting new application.

7. Additional enhancements to the SEEs application that need attention that have not been identified at this time.

Requirements:

1. Experience in application coding and in creating computer applications and/or databases

2. 5+ years' experience using Oracle database

3. 5+ years of PL/SQL development experience

4. 5+ years Java application development

5. At least three (5) years of current, professional IT experience in full life cycle development of custom web applications which must include Java/J2EE development experience; Oracle SQL development experience; and a strong understanding and experience with XML.

6. Ability to work independently to research and problem solve issues

7. Ability to work with end users to troubleshoot production issues

8. Ability to document solutions/processes as needed

Preferred: The following preferred qualifications must be demonstrated on application, if relevant.

1. Oracle EXADATA.

2. Oracle built in DBMS packages.

3. 3+ years of Unix scripting

4. Experience with Toad.

5. Spring Framework, and Struts 2.

6. JDeveloper as an Integrated Development Environment (IDE).

7. Experience with WebLogic application server.

8. Experience with Cognos BI Reporting.

9. Experience with Tableau Reporting.

10. Subversion (SVN) as a source control platform.

11. Web services.

12. Experience with UI technologies such as AJAX, JSTL, JSP, HTML, DHTML, JavaScript, and CSS.

13. Experience with k-12 data/systems.

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver, CO,,Job Description
P&C insurer has an exciting and challenging opportunity for a student actuary with 2+ years of experience in an insurance or actuarial role. This individual should be experienced with combining data sets from multiple sources and varying database types, as well as the ability to be creative & to manage concurrent projects and reporting schedules. Strong programming skills – Microsoft SQL, Oracle SQL, R, Python, etc. are required. Strong communication skills and experience with Business Intelligence reporting package such as Business Objects, Cognos, Tableau, QlikView or Microsoft Power BI are ideal. (#48880),Title: Data Security Analyst
Location: Denver, CO 80203
Duration: 6 Months
Job Description:
Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users.
Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 1 year or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area.
Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.
Preferred Qualification:
CCNA
CCNP+ (security)
CCSA (security)
Linux
About our Company:
Connecting people’s aptitude & ambitions with our opportunities to deliver results.
22nd Century Staffing is a Minority & Woman Owned Business Enterprise (MWBE) that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Our journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions.
Our Global Delivery model with over 110 recruiters, data miners and research analysts working across multiple time zones is backed by an internal database of 800,000 resources across all major industries.
With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Staffing is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",This team is responsible for leading two primary efforts that will improve the customer experience through analytics and technology. The first is to aggregate and analyze data across multiple customer contact and interaction channels including IVR, CRM, call switch detail, truck roll and ticketing. Additionally the team partners with other internal and external organizations to analyze marketing, web and customer satisfaction data. Ultimately this analysis will allow us to understand the effectiveness of the channels, how channel contacts impact one another and finally improve how the channels allow customers to interact with the business. The second effort is to implement an enterprise wide call management software suite that allows us to understand real-time call metrics from the enterprise to agent level. The software also provides a workforce management overlay allowing for an understanding of actual to planned agent staffing and call handling metrics. In these efforts the objective is to foster durable, strategic, mutually beneficial relationships, with emphasis on achieving long-term strategic goals as well as executing in a timely and cost effective manner that meets our business, customer and quality objectives Key Job Responsibilities (attached job description) Time Allocation % Daily 1. Analyze data throughout Comcast’s databases (SQL) 2. Comprehend Business needs/questions, build stories (pivot table exp.) on what they found after going through that data and iterating those stories 3. Interact w/ business, communication is huge 4. Projects include Einstein Application Analysis, working with high contact rate customers, truck rolls, analyzing metrics, etc. Most Important Skill Sets/Certifications That Candidate MUST have 1. SQL Database 2. Previous experience as Data Analyst & Business Analyst 3. Excel & PowerPoint 4. THE FOLLOWING ARE NICE TO HAVES: Netezza, Tableau, Hadoop, Java, experience w/ Teradata,Job Description


Job #: 1068993

Apex Systems Inc. in Denver, Colorado is looking for an Application Support Analyst to work with one of our top clients!

This position provides the opportunity to learn Big Data tools such as Hive, Hadoop, and ElasticSearch, while working with a company that promotes growth.

An ideal candidate will possess the following:
2+ years of experience in application support
Knowledge and experience with troubleshooting RESTful API’s
Experience analyzing Big Data in Splunk or Kibana
Experience creating SQL queries
Analytical mindset and enjoys solving complex issues
If you are interested in applying, please email the most up-to-date version of your resume to Carley Packard at cpackard@apexsystems.com .

EEO Employer

Apex Systems is an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate or allow discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, or related medical conditions), age, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, genetic information, registered domestic partner status, marital status, disability, status as a crime victim, protected veteran status, political affiliation, union membership, or any other characteristic protected by law. Apex will consider qualified applicants with criminal histories in a manner consistent with the requirements of applicable law. If you have visited our website in search of information on employment opportunities or to apply for a position, and you require an accommodation in using our website for a search or application, please contact our Employee Services Department at employeeservices@apexsystemsinc.com or 844-463-6178.,CDHS requires a Business Data Analyst III to support the Trails Modernization project with the conversion of Crystal 10 reports to Crystal 13 reports. The Business Data Analyst III will be responsible for the technical reporting design, new report development and modification of existing reports. In addition, the Business Data Analyst III must be able to provide technical documentation and participate in report troubleshooting with the CDHS Trails OIT team and the Trails Modernization development vendor. This position works closely with team members to ensure alignment across each service application, system and service, including implementation of coding standards, version control, security standards, and application optimization aligned with the position’s area of responsibility. This position is also responsible for ensuring each solution is managed following the System Development Life Cycle.

Deliverables include:
Conversion of existing reports from Crystal 10 to Crystal 13
Creation of new reports on Oracle 10 or above with Crystal 13
Participate in the report requirements gathering process
Develop and execute SQL queries, packages, etc.
Sources of information include:
Existing application and associated reports, queries, packages
Existing documentation
Report design documents
OIT Report Developers
Position Requirements
Minimum Requirements:
5+ years of experience as a software/report developer in progressively more complex assignments with experience managing requirements for software application development, service delivery, and customer satisfaction, or relevant experience in an IT applications/solutions delivery role.
Undergraduate degree from an accredited college or university in information technology, computer science, or related field. (Relevant experience may be substituted for education at the hiring manager’s discretion.)
Documented proficiency working with report development on Oracle 10 or above and experience with both Crystal 10 and Crystal 13.
Familiarity with producing technical documentation.
Preferred Qualifications:
Knowledge of the Trails OIT SDLC business processes
Crystal report version 10 and 13 experience. Conversion experience is a plus
Good understanding of Oracle database with hands-on experience
Excellent PL/SQL skills
Crystal Server 11 and developer version 13
Hands on experience developing the reports with 2 - 3 yrs on Oracle 10 or above
SQL server experience writing packages, procedures, views etc. in PL/SQL for at least 2 or 3 yrs
Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver, US-CO,Client is contracting for an on-site, temporary, full-time contractor resource Database Programmer to analyze, develop and implement enhancements to the existing CDE systems, Record Integration Tracking System (RITS System), Educator Identification System (EDIS System), RITS READ, and EDIS READ.
At the heart of these systems is the ability to identify a student/educator based on demographic data provided by School Districts.
The RITS/EDIS Matching Engines are implemented in 2002 using the Oracle 8i database, tables, views and PL/SQL (stored procedures and user defined functions).
This component implements the student matching functionality, the gate through which student demographic data is passed to insure the State Assigned Student Identifier remains as correct as possible.
The Sr. Database Programmer shall be contracted to
Modernize the above four systems by taking advantage of the new features available in CDE's current Oracle database version is 11g R2 running in Oracle EXADATA platform.
He/ She shall be looking at ways to enhance the processing time for the RITS/EDIS Matching Engines, reduce the number of review cases that CDE administrator manually review, and enhance the matching logic to better match Students/ Educator records.
Review and enhance RITS Archive engine.
The primary purpose of the archive and purge function is to remove old data from the system which provides the following benefits:
Improved system response times.
The online database contains less data which decreases the amount of time it takes the system to wade through the data and produce the desired output.
Less stale data as the older information is not displayed by the RITS Web application.
Close the refresh gap/delta between RITS Read and RITS Web so that they match as closely as possible.
Look at large tables to identify candidates for partitioning.
Additional Database enhancements that need attention that have not been identified at this time.

Requirements:
Experience in application coding and in creating computer applications and/or databases
5+ years' experience using Oracle database
5+ years of PL/SQL development experience
3+ years of Unix scripting is a plus
Ability to work independently to research issues
Ability to work with end users to troubleshoot production issues
Ability to document solutions/processes as needed
Preferred:
Oracle EXADATA.
Oracle built in DBMS packages.
Experience with Toad.

About our Company:
Connecting people’s aptitude & ambitions with our opportunities to deliver results.
22nd Century Staffing is a Minority & Woman Owned Business Enterprise (MWBE) that supports demanding staffing programs for Corporations and State and Local Government Agencies. Our journey began in 1997 by supporting large Federal contracts which nudged us in the direction of creating large candidate pools across the country. Over the last 20 years, we have built a strong business model that is carefully constructed to deliver on multiple facets. We have proven past performance of providing services that exceed our clients' expectations. Today 22nd Century supports clients in all 50 states and has grown to be a company that is trusted and sought for providing a complex mix of workforce solutions.
Our Global Delivery model with over 110 recruiters, data miners and research analysts working across multiple time zones is backed by an internal database of 800,000 resources across all major industries.
With a firm grip on the entire spectrum of staffing solutions, we have placed more than 500,000 skilled resources and delivered 15 million+ man-hours.
“22nd Century Staffing is an Equal Opportunity Employer" and “US Citizens & all other parties authorized to work in the US are encouraged to apply.",Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users. Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 1 year or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area. Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.

EndPoint Security:
Endpoint Security

Scope: Management of Endpoint Security systems and configurations

Description: Assist with the management and support of state enterprise endpoint security services. Including working with end users to find resolution to endpoint related issues.

Monitor and implement all necessary updates to all endpoint security software

Develops methodology and documents configurations and configuration changes to the anti-virus and endpoint security systems.

Provides additional Endpoint security as needed

Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver, US-CO,Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users. Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 1 year or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area. Has knowledge of commonly-used concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on instructions and pre-established guidelines to perform the functions of the job.

SCOPE

The Vendor shall be responsible for providing qualified candidates to:
CISCO and Palo Alto Firewall administration
Function as security administrator for managing agency and data center firewalls, enterprise Web filtering, endpoint security systems, VPN/remote access, access control, and other security devices.
Responsible for the configuration, deployment and maintenance of the enterprise security infrastructure.
Provides frontline support for implementation and management of a variety of security systems.
Project implementation tasks associated with a 2FA solution and Security Operations maintenance
Ensures change management is strictly followed for all production systems, utilizing the CA system for all production related system changes
Provides additional network security services as needed
Effectively communicate with project team members with clear, concise, and easy to understand language
Work collaboratively to ensure project deliverables are met and meet customer needs
Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver , Colorado, US-CO,Location Centennial, CO Description Our client is currently seeking a Business Systems Analyst-Data. Seeking Local Candidates Only. For immediate consideration email copy of current resume to Amanda at ajauriguejudge.com This job will have the following responsibilities Act as requirements project lead for medium to large projects, directing and coordinating requirements project staff and activities. Oversee production support of core projects, including gathering and documenting requirements, translating functional requirements to technical requirements, and identifying options. Partner with business users and act as a liaison between business and technical teams. Coordinates development, testing, and implementation of solutions with vendors. Demonstrated experience as a Business Analyst with track record of delivering business process requirements and use cases is required. Solid experience and understanding of Agile Scrum and Rational Unified Process Methodology in developing use cases, use case model, supplementary requirements, and business rules is essential. Solid understanding of relevant business issues. Strong interpersonal, analytical, problem-solving, influencing, prioritization, decision- making and conflict resolution skills. Qualifications Requirements Excellent written and verbal communication skills. Strong knowledge of MS Project, Excel, MS Word and iGraphx or Visio Drawing tools along with general familiarity with Outlook and other MS Office applications is also required. Top Three Technical Must Have Skills - ETL tool(s) like (Talend Informatica), Data warehousing concepts (with complex SQL heavy experience), Big Data (Hadoop) technologies. Top Three Nice To Have Skills - Data modelling experience (ERWIN), Data Architecture , Data profiling. Contact ajauriguejudge.com mailtoajauriguejudge.com?subjectBusiness20Systems20Analyst-Data This job and many more are available through The Judge Group. Find us on the web at www.judge.com httpwww.judge.com,Contract Duration: 9 Months

Location: Denver, Colorado 80203

ob Description

Cyber Network Security Engineer (firewalls, VPN's)

Maintains systems to protect data from unauthorized users. Identifies, reports, and resolves security violations. May require a bachelor's degree in area of specialty and at least 2 years or equivalent experience in the field or in a related area. Familiar with standard concepts, practices, and procedures within a particular field. Relies on experience and judgment to plan and accomplish goals. Performs a variety of tasks. A certain degree of creativity and latitude is required.

The Vendor shall be responsible for providing qualified candidates to:
CISCO and Palo Alto Firewall administration
Function as security administrator for managing agency and data center firewalls, enterprise Web filtering, endpoint security systems, VPN/remote access, access control, and other security devices.
Responsible for the configuration, deployment and maintenance of the enterprise security infrastructure.
Provides frontline support for implementation and management of a variety of security systems.
Project implementation tasks associated with a 2FA solution and Security Operations maintenance
Ensures change management is strictly followed for all production systems, utilizing the CA system for all production related system changes
Provides additional network security services as needed
Effectively communicate with project team members with clear, concise, and easy to understand language
Work collaboratively to ensure project deliverable s are met and meet customer needs
Required Skills

Required Experience

Job Location
Denver, Colorado, US-CO,Salary:
Published Job Title:
Data Analyst Supporting the DEA

Requisition::
20-242

Worksite::
DEA

Position Schedule::
Full-time

Description::
Be a part of the nationwide law enforcement initiative that removes the tools of crime from criminal organizations, depriving wrongdoers of proceeds from their crime and impacting the infrastructure of criminal enterprises.

Focused on delivering unsurpassed services in support of law enforcement and homeland security, FSA, a rapidly growing joint venture owned by trusted solutions providers SAIC and Amentum, has a vacancy for a Data Analyst. In this role, you will be supporting the overall mission of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).

Responsibilities
Receives, gathers, analyzes, and organizes 